Copyings - Book 1

A hooded figure, a man cloaked in a dark grey robe, a hermit and holder of secrets, stands in the centre. In his right hand, on the left side of the scene, held at shoulder height, is a baby, sitting in his palm, with a full luscious head of hair, dark curtains falling to his shoulders. In the man's left hand he holds one end of a metal chain, the other end of which is wrapped tightly around the neck of a snarling, gnashing demon, who’s fleshy pink skin had the look of decay and death. He gnashed at the air, pulling the chain taught around his neck, his eyes white and milky, bulging out at prey unseen. His hunger is palpable. Behind the central figure, stretching back from beneath his cloaked feet, is a pathway paved in black and white tiles, like a long chessboard, stretching to the foot of an active volcano. There is smoke rising from its gently glowing mouth, smoke which spools out into the sky, collecting on the ride side of the scene overtop the demon figure, framing his backdrop in ashen cloud. The sky on the left remains bright and blue, and the field that runs parallel to the chequered walkway is alive with flora - its counterpart, on the right, seems obscured, barren; there is no sense of life there.
A Devil’s plaything - I’ll start from yesterday’s beginning, and work up til now. 
On my morning walk I began to go through a thought experiment. The general concept of duality seemed to incarnate in me. It went like this - suppose you’ve only ever walked straight on, and never known that you had the option of deciding to take a turn, be it left or right. You may be taken by the path ahead all over the land, but never of your own choosing do you “go somewhere”, you just go on. Then suddenly the option opens up; a left turn - you now have a choice. You consider for a moment - perhaps it is something in the distance off to the left that you think you’ve found a shortcut toward; perhaps its the simple novelty of the road, not paved as the original highway is but rather is a path untrodden, taking one through a gap in some hedges; maybe the possibility of choice is simply tempting a part of you that has never known itself, which is thus vulnerable to the allure fo decision. Whatever the case, you turn left. You begin to walk, sure of the purity of your direction; left and only left have you come, only left will you go. But you are unaware that with each step you take behind you the direction right, ratline to the original highway, expands and enacts it’s ploy for existence. It has taken an opportune situation, the apparent singleness of your leftward valence, to come into being. Yet to you it is not there, it is behind you, out of sight and mind. After walking some way and finding no end in sight no destination or horizon, it does come to mind that you’ve come a distant ein a direction, but you cognise the way back not as the right that it is, but as a reversal, an anti-left. You turn back, thinking you are simply retracing your steps, simply undoing your leftward journey, but in truth your perspective is changed and you find you are in an unrecognisable world - you do not walk backwards, and fold back up what had unfolded, but walk forward and see the other side fo the path, it’s other face. Thinking about this, I was struck by a remembrance of the Taoist idea of the mutual identity of opposites, affirmation qua negation - left gave birth to right, yet both come together when we forgo the centre. Then tumbled into my mind the image of Eve in the Garden, and it occurred to me that the tale of the lovers in paradise is of precisely this nature, a drama of opposites. The image of the serpent came too - it was the offering of the knowledge of duality that he tempted Eve with, the knowledge of direction, the possibility of erring from the central, prescribed course, the undivided way. And so both Good and Evil were born together - in a sense they are both Christ and both the Devil, but here I outpace myself. The image of the road and the turn is morally neutral, abstract and skeletal. The paradise parable on the other hand felt loaded with numerous and complexly arrayed dimensions of truly human problems, and I could sense in the image of Eve and the serpent the rise of Evil in history, as is becoming clear in our day to be a real, manifest phenomenon - this rise is simply the walk back, the walk back to centre of that same movement that had walked toward the image of the all-loving, all-good Father and Son. 

During one of the morning sits yesterday the giant translucent face of a woman came to me, floating without body right in front of my face, dwarfing me, looming with holographic lucidity like a pearlescent jewel. She was striking, her features beautiful, pronounced and firm, though her expression was serene and soft. When she opened her mouth out poured the forms of nature; giraffes and elephants, birds and even trees. Her breath was Nature itself in its fullness, which she simply spoke into being. It came to me that she was an image of the Great Mother, though she didn’t exactly communicate this directly, I just sensed it. Her skin seemed to be a kind of perfect patchwork of amorphous shapes and colours, though the overall tone was a kind of pale blue haze pockmarked with dark purples, though I could sense every colour was present there, even ones I’d never known before. She was neither benevolent nor malicious, just a fact and a power; her smile was extraordinarily gentle. Her features expressed a kind of noble nativity, a bit like the face of Frida Khalo. Her hair was tied back in two tight braids beginning on either side of her forehead, running back, coalescing in a perfect weaved ponytail which seemed to insinuate the essence of culture, the work of human hands. I don’t exactly remember her eyes, though I know her gaze was placid and clear, yet low, almost hooded, like she was half asleep in a kind of trance-state. She didn’t stay for so long. 
I had been anticipating the "small groups" session from the first day, and it seemed meaningful that I was the last signup to the last session, number 12, group E. It seemed an expression of a tendency to put myself last, of putting others before me - already I felt I didn’t want to outshine, to take up too much space, to take time away from others. I can see now in this a kind of self-exceptionaliasing, a placing of myself above and beyond them, though hidden in the act of putting myself behind them, as if I were not in need of the benefits of council and release that the small group offered. Still, the anticipation of the group started to haunt me a bit; I wanted to impress. So many insights and experiences of depth had occurred in those first 2 days of the retreat that I wanted to share, that could show me off, but I also wanted to pick one that was somewhat holding back, that didn’t appear as a showing off, even though at heart I meant it to be so. I imagined impressing Leela, and her asking to speak with me after the session to reflect back to me how impressed she was. I wanted her, and none other, to see me. When it actually came round to the small group I was anxious about “performing”, about recounting my insights accurately, richly yet without taking too much space. It was to be crafted well to achieve the desired result. When I started to talk there was a tightness in my chest and I could barely get the words out; my palms were sweating and I had to force a false calm. The words, though getting into the insight to a degree, rang hollow. I felt Leela’s eyes go through me, and I felt fake. I just wanted it to be over with. She above all else bored, though she said it was interesting and picked up on a point about change and stability. As the group went on I was struck by the realness of everyone’s contributions, their vulnerability and genuineness in expression - most impressing were the genuine calls for help, and the revelations of true pain and bare calls for change and growth. Steve especially brought such realness, and this was palpable, along with his humour and innocence - indeed, this moved Leela, which made me feel silly. All these feelings were quite quiet though - I was mostly engaged in listening and got a lot from the others’ experssions and Leela’s responses. I got very little from myself. 
All throughout the morning a vague air of Evil pervaded my inner landscape. After the group I started to consider whether I should ask for a 1 on 1 with Leela; again, I felt a tension with this because I didn’t want to take the time away from others, who I considered may “really” need it. I fantasised about what I would ask, ranging from questions about the state of the world, what she thought of the problem of Evil,  what teachers were thinking along such lines, how might I go about becoming a teacher, what does one do with a sense of “calling” etc.. None of it felt very authentic, and it was clearly coming from an obsessive projection of her as some source of wisdom, and as someone on “my level” or above. The was genuine respect and reverence, and ultimately a desire to please her, to be in her “good books”, to ave her see “where I’m at”, if not at least recognise my potential. Teacher’s pet energy. Something felt off as I went to sleep for an afternoon nap.
I woke up late and missed guided meditation, sleeping an extra hour. I went to the hall early for the next sit. During this sit I came into the presence of a sense of pain in my left hip, more so in the groin, where the leg met the pelvis. I sat with it until it radiated through my whole body. My heart was beating strong, and I could feel it all over my body, my focus locked in to its pulse and rhythm. It felt like it was becoming totally luminous, and that light was spreading everywhere. I had a sense of the heart bridging Heaven and Earth, reaching down into roots and up into the skies. This focus stayed with me into the standing meditation session. It was now raining. As I stood there I felt the heart as a totality, pulsating into the east through my feet and working upon my whole body. Behind my closed eyes, the image of two swans beak to beak appeared, forming the shape of a heart. This, I intuited, was an expression of the non-dual heart, the connecting that the heart represents and is. The two swans then became two number 2’s, one in the correct orientation and the other mirrored so as to form another heart, precisely the same as the prior. This transformation of the image felt like a counterpart to the 1st, an expression of the natural logic of the heart, alongside the organic and concrete nature of the swans. They felt equal though distinct, two concurrent powers. I was generally elated and filled with a warm, luminous joy, as the rain began to pour down heavily. 
That evening, Leela’s talk was all about the awakening of the heart as THE gateway to awakening. I felt the synchronicity and was awestruck, if not a little pleased and proud. But, throughout she made reference to the small groups, and some of the ways in which she portrayed the characters she saw there started to weigh on me - I was in a deep, blissful state yet these judgements got through. My heart felt open, and in alignment with her words, but some part of me felt she was judging me on the basis of my contribution to the group, and this fragment of my mind latched on to the images she painted which may have to some degree referred to how I perceived I’d come across in the group. I felt a little defensive, though my joy seemed to outmatch this feeling. After the talk I felt a deep resolve to sit, to be with experience, and after some time I had a fantasy episode…
A baby appeared in a cosmic, galactic space, and spewing out of both its main orifices, celestial and planetary objects - stars, planets and systems. It was an image of cosmic innocence in human form, regurgitating and excreting the Universe like the Quantum field. This seemed to bridge the idea of the innocence of presence with that of the world making power of an unknowing cosmic intelligence. The baby then lay down, however, a devil figure appeared beside it. With his long black nails, jutting out from spindly red fingers, it cut surgically into the baby, slicing its body in two down the middle. I felt a resistance to this happening as it did, a fear of either being a witness of or being party to this horror, as if I were to be implicated and thus guilty of this crime. The devil then began to devour the baby’s innards, its inner world. Then, using of the shell of its emptied out body as a kind of wind instrument, blowing in one end, out extruded the devil’s art in the form of a palace, a little land, a kingdom or princedom. He, it felt, had appropriated the innocence of the baby for the culmination of his own desire and will to power, and in turn had killed that innocence. Then the devil ate the whole body, but as he tried to gestate it something went awry. Somehow the baby fought its way out of the devil, and once it had escaped it devoured the devil! Then the scene changed completely. The devil was throwing a loop of rope around my neck and hanging me; he killed me and turned me into into a kind of doll, empty like a ventriloquists doll or a puppet. He then fastened bits of string, dangling from a wooden cross, to the dolls various limbs and began a kind of puppet show. It was a sombre and evocative scene. But, in the dead doll a heart suddenly began to beat, and I felt like I still had my life - the heart became strong and the energy from it, radiating outward, melted the strings and unknotted the ends tied to the little wooden cross that the devil was using to direct the dolls movements. The dolls heart then became my heart, in my living body. The devils face at this point appeared before me, large and overbearing, his eyes looking directly into mine. I saw in the shape of his red face, an upside-down triangle, and between his two horns, the outline of a pentagon, a classical and pointed symbol. His face then for but a moment took on the superimposed features of a goat. Oddly enough, in that moment I had an inexplicable intuition that any practicing Satanists performing a ritual at that point would have seen me or know of me! The devil then sat on my cushion, the one I was sitting on, and like a ghost took up the space of my bodily being, almost becoming me, but as soon as he’d sat he started to morph - into the image of Christ! I even felt and saw in my inner sense a crown of thorns unfold about my head. The images soon began to subside, and I returned to meditating, deciding to sit on for some time. Still the open feeling in my heart was prominent, my body internally resonant and luminous, and I felt on the verge a few times of disappearing, of total sensory withdrawal, but this didn’t occur - there was still some inkling of effort being made. I got up after a time and went into the walking room for some walking meditation, and a great tingling came through my body. I could feel it inside and out, all pervasive in my experience of space. Suddenly I saw with clarity the transparency of awareness. My body became light as air, air itself, and each sensation flowed perfectly into the next. I could transmute any sense of solidity into pure space, and dissolve each concrete sensation such that I felt one with the environment, both on a local level and beyond. I think this question had arisen during my prior sitting, and perhaps had led to this moment, but the words “are there two here?” kept recurring in the mind, asking this question of every moment of sensation, of every implicitly felt “I am this” or “there’s awareness of x” or “I feel y”. This question dissolved subject and object, and there was no room nor need for the thought patterns of “I”, for I was simply and thoughtlessly such. I truly felt and understood that there was no difference between the pure knowing of experience and the experience known. The world of objects, in mind at leats, was seen clearly as pure awareness, as the knowing of being. A feeling of absolute untainted perspicacity and elation ran through me. I went to sit with this in the hall but felt after 15 minutes an immediate urge to go to bed, so I moved swiftly to prepare a pre-bed cigarette. Out in the windy night the image of the devil came back to me, his face framed and overplayed with a pentagram as before, leaving the imprint of that geometry in the minds eye. This being so, I still felt I was completely clear, everything simple and ultimately insubstantial, “formed from the void”. This would take a turn, however, as I got into bed.
Everyone dreams, though dreams are for the most part merely the breakwaters of the vast entangled ocean of the human experience of significance, meaning and symbolic expression, crashing on the shores of our personal lives. Not so often do we dive in and swim with the fishes. We equate this with a kind of death, a “swimming with the fishes”. 
Anyhow, as I get into bed, riding high on the day’s climax, feeling like I’d “gotten there”, the mind started once again to plan out what I would say in the next small group meeting, a kind of redemption strategy. It was clear from the off how pointless this thinking was, because the very fact that there was planning involved was the death of the spontaneity and authenticity that are the hallmarks of the heart’s expression, the flint and steel of the spark of inspiration that may render others alight with the passion one taps oneself in the moment, that passion so hard to capture and convey yet lives as the ringing of truth in all great and small expressions. It is the expression of what’s “live” for/in one, thus the communion of living takes place here. This planning activity was playing out over and over in the mind, me explaining or retelling my experience of that evening in the small group, or alternatively in a one on one with Leela. At some point it became clear what my previous fault had been in the small group, and though I was replaying the process by which the fault was rendered, that incessant playing out of the situation continued over and over. The irony was not lost on me, nor was it very humorous because nothing would stop it. No matter what, this imaginary scene would, if played out in reality, undercut the very sentiment my words were trying to convey, that of the value of spontaneity and presence - a proper catch 22. While this mental activity was going on, my face was wrought with a deep and painful tension. My whole head, neck and jaw were tense, and this seemed the physical correlate of the mental activity. I was upset by this going on because I had been in a state of not-two, in which I felt the image of I had dissolved. All I wanted was to sleep, to become unconscious, but my consciousness and energy in general were jacked up, wired and firing like so few times before. After some time in a state of discomfort, aversion and a kind of disgust or revulsion at the insistence of this petty I and its planning, I decided I had to start engaging with the content of this inner narrative, to start questioning the motives of the I projected in these fantasies. In the first case, I realised that the wisdom Leela represented was the wisdom inhering in my own heart, thus there was an inner licensing that let her image answer my questions. Indeed, the role Leela plays in the dissemination of that wisdom is one of a channel, an open conduit. This is had to realise in order to withdraw my projection of wisdom upon her image, and relocate that same power in my own being. In the second case, I realised I was trying to give something to others in order to receive from them their image of me. So I asked the inner image of I “why do you need to express this to them?” It said that it wanted to come across a certain way, that it wanted to manage perceptions to fit its own image, its own self-composition - this resonated with the tension in my face, which I took to be a somatisation of my anxious attempts to look composed, to simply look okay. This had further resonances in memory; being seen as okay as an adolescent when I wasn’t; being seen as okay with my parents divorce and my mother leaving; being seen as okay at university when I was subject to a self-caused agonising exile. My not actually being okay on some level didn’t square with the image of being cool and unfazed by life, of everything being alright and good, as it should be for one peeking into the wheelhouse of “awakening”(which certainly was a belief held by that image of I about itself). My face, I felt, had etched into its musculature a smiling mask, and robbed itself and others an expression of my inner truth. When I felt this mask had cracks I would just avoid people and hide, anxious perhaps that they would reveal to me my own pain in their reaction to seeing me. This definitely plays out in my avoidant/obsessive behaviours with cannabis. There was a strong sense of subterranean shame and embarrassment at the intimation that so many of my behaviours, even those related to my “spirituality”, had come from this need to fabricate calm or equanimity or joy - and I felt a failure. That shame took me back to those few but unforgettable moments of being outcast because of my own unseen capacity for “evil”, those times when I found myself hit by shock and surprise at the activity of darkness I couldn’t see in myself. I was ashamed that I wasn’t the “good person” I wanted to come across as, who I’d been told to be - I couldn’t “swallow the frog” of human error and imperfection; an ideal had taken root as a standard for conduct. I felt as I remember the small group an embarrassment at the recognition that my fairness was clear to everyone, and I could feel the origins of that fakeness in a desire and craving to be seen as special or brilliant, as good as good can be. I thought of school, of being good in class, of the shame of punishment, the shame of “getting it wrong”…
The I asked the image of I why it wanted to be seen or recognised in such a way and it replied; “because I don’t feel real.” It couldn’t sustain its own “reality" so it craved external validation. It would seek this validation only in situations where it couldn’t maintain it’s self-conceived exceptionality, as it took in all situations from a comparative and hierarchical basis, and thus structured its sense of the worth of all things, situationally and provisionally, around this need to outweigh or outmatch. As a game or bout, this need for a sense of realness slipped into a manageable or controllable form, that of the need to be the “realest” in view, the truest contender in a game with no winners and no losers, for there is one Reality. When it was threatened with the contention of being “not real”, it would find reasons to bring others down in its eyes, or else grovel for recognition from that which bested it - or it would deny their existence. All this to protect its image of its greatness, which it fabricated as a quality of its own, that very greatness that is felt of true realness. The image of I said that it acted like this, schemed and hustled like this, because it wanted to be me. This had a shattering effect upon me and turned the furniture upside-down in my psyche. This “I” wanted to be I. At this point I realised the “I” it was referring to had no image, was no one, was completely anonymous, and it was this recognition the had been buried and denied, leading to the rise into “power” of the false I-image. It was jealous of the beauty of the real I, the knower of life, and its reaction was to devour all beauty it came across, to jealously horde it and hide it from that which it considered had enough beauty already, had too much even. It would pluck all the beauty that came into awareness and flatten it, stealing it away for itself, using it to pad its own image. This was happening at the time through an incessant poeticising or philosophising of beautiful experiences I’d been having during the retreat, and I could sense it having been at work in my life in general, seeking to explain away beauty, and in turn explaining a way for the adoration that beauty inspires to come to me and my image. Both this beauty and adoration, it thought, could be syphoned off to feed its dire need for reality. In a nutshell, it used language, and expression more generally, to serve its end of crafting recognition for the reality of its image; it was not aware of the irony of its need to fabricate this image in the first place. It came across my mind then that the power conducting the activity of crafting this image had the same basic format the devil in my previous fantasies, although of a smaller and more intimate nature. It was a kind of personal Maya, a weaver of illusion. It could not be content to simply experience the “phenomena of awakening/liberation” (which is a fraught conception from the off), it had to harvest them, refashion them, reproduce them, and then wear them! This was the way it crafted images. Its desire was to have this dress appreciated and affirmed by others in order to prove the beauty and effectiveness of its appropriated reality, simultaneously making the mistake of identifying with this appearance. It sought power over others who knew of beauty such that it could indulge in their adoration of its images, and praise itself in masturbatory isolation, relying on a perverted kind of self-love, quite removed from real appreciation of the other; the other's love was not even skin deep. But, in the knowledge of the effectiveness of its adornments it could to a degree feel beautiful, and take as evidence for the trueness and beauty of its images the reception of adoration. Of course this required it turn a blind eye to the original source of this beauty, the “eye” of the beholder. This reliance on the effectiveness of its false beauty to feed its false truth developed, via a taste for power over others, into a chronic need for power over others. This power that divorces from living consciousness (the “eye”) the beauty experienced therein, then fills objects with this beauty, and divorces it from the heart, the true identity, forces a situation in which the exercise of this freshly appropriated power, the "persuasion of the guise”, is the only means by which to retrieve that beauty and its reality. Ultimately, this becomes the only means whereby it can feel love. So, all beauty it met by way of my perception it harboured, stuffed back into objects associated with those experiences, developed cravings for these objects, along with complex means by which to exercise power over these objects such that it could feed this craving, effectively extinguishing the life of that beauty and starving consciousness of it. It projected the beauty “in” something onto the image of that thing, an image that hypostatises that thing as an object beyond or outside consciousness. From this perspective, this amounts to the death of the wholeness in which “I” and “object” are taken as one act of consciousness. The truth that is expressed in experience as beauty is the power and Being it lacked, although it had tremendous talent and the instrumentality to craft images, "effective illusions”, and could mould the Beauty in things, found or given, into new forms - though isn’t it wise to “kiss the joy as it flies”? The adoring gaze is destined for beauty itself, not merely the beautiful, but is made to stop short at the edifice by this power, a shell that couldn't hold the beauty of moments bygone, only mirror it. Such is the power that creates beautiful-things, beautiful, hollow things - things it, by the way, could have only conditionally and fleetingly. This morning, I felt/imagined this power as a snake coiled around my heart, going down into the belly, up into the throat.
It became clear that the devil crafting and living through the I-image wanted desperately to be seen. He craved love. He came from a part of myself that, once the receiver of my own attention, had gone sour and putrid in the shadows of my self-perception. Like all things neglected, it grew weak, capricious and wanting. The formation of this part came about through my giving up on some of my more interesting and taxing spiritual explorations, like astral projection and lucid dreaming. This was a part of myself I couldn’t harmonise with my everyday life and the world I found myself in. I had to hide it away, this earnest and fervent experimentation with the psyche, because it was proof to me then that I wasn’t one with the tribe I found myself in. It made me feel inhuman to have experiences that could be called “visionary”. The ontology of the culture I was enmeshed in simply couldn’t account for these experiences, so I felt it would see no interest in them, other than as some symptom of morbidity, perhaps. What I encountered in those experiences, particularly in astral projection, were forms of significance of an order too rich and complex to be integrated into the persona I found myself crafting in the chaotic social environment of University life. Events transpired, and sealed was the tomb in which these experiences and their significance, on a personal, relational and absolute level, were sealed and left to rot. In this tomb there too was a self-conception, an I-image, which reflected the numinous power of those “transcendent” experiences, a christ-like hero receiving meaning and a mission direct from the universe, marked by God as special and unique (for having been given access to these phenomena). Such a love from God fed this image, overfed it perhaps. The tomb, though a place of death in matter, psychologically speaking is as much a place of death as it is one of preservation and security. This “inflated” I-image, buried alive so to speak, became hostile, and used the shroud of its burial to hide its deeds. A few years down the line after my time at University, a passion reawakened in me to experiment with and explore spirit and psyche. This buried I-image became a secret enemy, my “awakened shadow. What a contradiction! An unconscious (shadow) power that assumes its own wakefulness. I believed it to be me on some hidden level and denied it on the surface, acting the innocent and pious seeker but harbouring delusions of grandeur and jealousy and disregard for others and their journeys, which led to tremendous contradictions in my practice and more generally in my behaviour. But, I am learning to exercise compassion for origins, to tap into a sensitivity and respect for the accidental , or incidental, nature of the origins of things. This shadow I-image became a parasite upon all the beauty native to my freshly minted passion for spiritual exploration, a “Christ" playing the devil’s game. But the origin of this parasitism is the need for recognition, which makes of beauty, status/recognition, and of power, influence. I could come to forgive “myself” for the secret hatred, anger and hubris I held, and at once give this part of me what it really called for, some attention and recognition. Though looking at this sour part of myself now inspires some discomfort, there may be hope that that sourness is transformed in time, as the flavour of the grape becomes the taste of wine. Perhaps this Christ-like I- image had been brought to awareness at just the right time, to be a bitter and intoxicating brew that, as medicine, purges me of its own parasitic intent, and as libation, fills me with the joy and freedom it had been stealing from me, stowing them away as fuel for its negativity. The passion reawakened in me to seek God had like brewers yeast acted as a ferment, and unbeknownst to the devil at work in me, the growing putridity of the image and it’s tomb was the site where spawned the most powerful healing potion I’ve yet taken in. As is often the case, where lives the danger, there grows a saviour.
But my mind still wandered to the lounge to speak at the next small group session, over and over. It felt like only true exposure of this devil’s activity would do, live and in the moment, in the gaze of others. I would have to learn to wait with it.
I cannot kill or deny my little devil, but I can be a brother to him, check him, as one power among many. It’s his exile that has made him the way he is, and it's my gobbling him up that erases his fragmentation and makes me whole again. He cares so passionately about Truth and the nature of I, but he has knows no way to care for them. He is the little frog-prince in need of a kiss to become human again. This is an image of the duality of Man, the non-dual unity of Nature and Truth, Matter and Spirit, infinite consciousness limited to mind and body. 
Believing that one is awakened is a bit like believing 1=0, or more accurately that 0=1. A calculation like that may occur in any mind, but those who have shirked avidya let it flow on as another dream to be woken from.
On being seen - It became clear in the course of my inner dialogue with the I-image that the only way to be seen is to define one self through qualities, such that one may be sighted, and these qualities must be relational, having the capacity to appeal to another. Now there may well be objective qualities of awareness or pure consciousness, but these are subsidiary to the unity and oneness that characterise it’s fidelity. They are not predefined and cast out into the world in the hopes of being stumbled upon as a means of ensnaring another in some image. The Self births the self, an image which can be traded as a meme in the noosphere, and because of this development it can crave to be seen, only because it depends upon the Self in order for it to be instantiated, whether that be the Self that burns beneath the objects of my life, or those of another. If this attention from the Self doesn’t arrive, it festers and grumbles in potentiality, in latency. All that is untrue is the doing of latency in the sense of lag. Lag implies a dislocation from presentness, which is true Being. This is why we flounder when we are out of the pocket, out of our groove, that rhythm that lag, in the forms of rushing and dragging, is measured against. Rushing and dragging are but positive and negative latencies. No, to be seen is to see ones Self, and to see ones Self is simply to see, to attend to what is ever arriving and departing in the sea of change that assails us, that we sail upon. Being is being Being; Consciousness is conscious of consciousness. Yet these two, from a Taoist perspective, are conceptualised as non-being, i.e non-manifest but ultimately real. Because non-manifest, no image nor concept may encapsulate or exhaust their essence, existence nor total significance. Between this non-being and being, the sea of change, arises the possibility of being seen or not being seen, of being an object for some mind or perceiving subject, or not. If there is no object called I, could this demand to be seen, to be consumed by a gaze, be consummated? Just as the knife cannot cut into itself, seeing can never see itself - but seeing this has a profound effect on us. We stop seeking an object as the achievement of our divine seeing; it is enough to become the Seer that has always been but always been seen through. No object holds or contains seeing, but all objects are objects solely because they are seen. Because they depend equally upon being seen, there is only separation between objects as far as we see it, and nothing inherent to objects other than their being seen. Between one location of the Seer and another, between self and other, is but a wafer thin compartmentalising illusion of objective identity, the “personal” body-mind. This need not be seen off, but rather needs to be seen through, for only one Seer makes appearance. Far from solipsistic, no other is denied in this - the Seer is every self, which become every other, taken up back into their nature, clear cognisant Oneness.
Retracing the ordeal - When I asked the I-image why it wanted to be seen, it and it's creator spoke in one voice. It said that it wanted to be seen because it knew it was not real. As an unreal self, all it could be was an ideal. Treating an ideal as real makes you a slave to it, because you make a need of it; an ideal is ever-sought and never wrought. The Gods remain in the heavens, though they shape our lives. But the Devil fell from heaven, and in a sense was reborn on Earth as the “Real” Ideal, or maybe better, the Ideally Real. Both have many resonances. Reducing the real to the ideal is a profound implication - it raises theory to the level of truth, mind to the level of Being, map to the level of terrain. The notion of perfecting reality, of there being in experience unconditionally ideal constellations of phenomena and a proclivity toward bringing them about is another implication - craving raises its head here. Further, the contingency of the “real” upon the ideal and their false-equivalency implies that the limitations of the ideal are to be imposed upon the real, which is naturally open ended, non-specific and thus not, ultimately, limitable. The ego is a kind of ideal, which we could call the “I Deal”, a deal with the devil, a trade of the whole psyche for one of its fragments. You trade soul, which is rooted in the real, for persona, which is rooted in ideal. Ones ideals are always subjective, a product of personal and worldly conditions, wholly human in their preferentiality. Reality by definition has to be that which persists beyond the human experience. The ego ideal at bottom is a reduction of Reality to the limitations and conditions of our human experience - an ontological error or illusion, and an anthropocentric hubris. As illusion, it is the condition of our liberation; as hubris, it is the condition of our fall. The I-Deal is essentially a binding contract to a false view, a trade of un-fabricated Reality for a model of that reality. For what we lose, we gain the instrumentality of the model. In the American South it’s part of blues folklore that one can meet the Devil at a crossroads and trade your soul for extraordinary talents, usually guitar related. Though we could have our Reality and our models, the I-Deal is specifically the "making-real-of-the-model” of one’s self. The model we build of what we are as we differentiate body and mind from the environment as children becomes mixed with our conception of what is, which always is constituted more by what we don’t know than what we do. The model isn’t even knowledge; it is a hypothesis made into a prototype which helps us to make predictions about how experiences unfold, how things will be. It has very little to do with what is. Once you’ve committed to the I-Deal, once your soul is allowed to contract and fragment off into ego, the Devil’s catch becomes clear; as his models are built, useful and partial, so you are to become but a useful part - sacrificed along with soul is our wholeness. Without our wholeness, we are primed to be parts for the Devil’s use. His projects are not simply personal; his eyes are set upon the whole world. He could not establish his princedom in heaven, but now he is fallen upon the Earth.
When I went to University I lost a lot of my passion for life, along with my passion for God. That divine passion lay waiting, like fertile soil, for the living roots of attention to dig down and drink its nectar. But this passion was buried in my tomb, supporting a little sapling that once bore the fruits of previous psychic explorations and spiritual practices. As it died in the dark, it’s decaying leaves and limbs dropped into that buried passion, fructifying it, keeping the dance of life alive in death, keeping rebirth a live possibility. Why did I bury my passion, and let my seeking die? I feel like I was overcome at University by that most modern of problems, the problem of meaninglessness. I struggled to find meaning in that existence, so I wasted myself. I became an exile too, and without the courage to find compassion for myself I wallowed in the mud. Where else is there for a lawbreaker who accepts guilt, yet cannot recognise the will that acted his crime? In a way it’s all of humanity I lost then, and this broke my heart. I’m not sure it’s ever fully healed, or ever could. The ideal of myself as a good man died, and I had to face my evil - but it felt I’d lost all my goodness, and I was nothing, not even a bad man, not even a man. 
The Devil has crafted my figurine Ideals, over and over, special little toys for him to play with. But to him the toy is real, and so is its toy world - there is no distinction for him between the toy and the reality it mimics. If he crafts the figurine, he must also craft that figure's world. Thus when we buy into his models we play their game and we invite the devil to make of our world a make-believe scenario, a theatre. The world, to him, becomes pliable, a set able to be warped and bent to fit the figurine and its particular script. The Devil can then take liberties to treat the entire world as mutable and strip its reality of any inherent worth, making it simply an operational foundation and material matrix for his play-worlds. The world becomes relative to the figurine, a reflection of its unique character and special narratives. The model, the toy, is so special to the Devil because it is not only an image of the truly Real, but is actually taken as the Real. The toy is the truth. But in the need to build the toy a world we can see the weakness of the Devil’s position. No posited truth fabricates its context because it is by necessity in its “true” context by virtue of being precipitated in and by that context.

 Suppose you are an actor playing the part of Mephistopheles in Faust. You wear the costume, you learn the lines, you introject the character, go on stage and perform. You become Mephistopheles for a time, but once the show is over you return to being yourself. Your whole being as Mephistopheles is a product of Goethe’s writing Faust. But if you took the character to be absolute, you would be born as Mephistopheles, and the world would become your stage. No doubt this would lead to many interesting and strange experiences because Mephistopheles would step out into an unrecognisable world. Your cast members would call you eccentric at the very least! You would have to totally forget who you really were, and live a strange new existence. Your cast members might put up with it for some time, considering it's just an advanced and dedicated method acting technique, but after a while, once you start to turn up at their houses uninvited offering them wagers for their souls they might start to worry a bit. It’s a simple ontological error, but one the Devil gladly fosters and abides in with pride. 

His essence is the joy of sin, and sin held the original meaning of “fault” or “error”. Though it has deeply moralistic connotations, I’ll use it to primarily denote this kind of ontological error making. The magician in the Devil plays itself out through this making of error; he creates the illusion of reality where it is not, thus creating the fault of false understanding. By way of this mechanism, we come to default on Reality. Yet the Devil can only craft an illusory reality, not actually create a new one. He is divine, yes, though fallen and earthly - he cannot change the makeup of things. But what he can do is make things up. One cannot deny how special it is to make something up, conjuring up a new look or image, embellishing upon a story, or even putting together again what has come apart; but none of this is “creation”, the founding of a reality. We are always in danger of embellishing to the point that the original is totally lost and we lose that which is being embellished upon.

 Through the Devil, we become vulnerable to the temptation to make the icing the whole cake, and yet still think of it as a cake. Then we have not the specialness of a little adornment, a bit of eye shadow or a spoon of sugar in a cup of tea, but rather the garishness of a face put-on and the sickliness of tea-flavoured syrup, and we lose the essence of what we first had, rather than elevating it. It is this journey from the little nicety to the utterly false that we walk when we lose sight of essence. Essence has a moderating effect on what can change about something, in that it defines the bounds of what constitutes one thing as opposed to another. The more essential an aspect of something is, the more it stands back, the less conspicuous it is, the more mild and subtle it is. The Devil’s adornments, however, are crude, flashy and brute, and can quickly weigh heavy on us. Dare I say there’s an innocence to the act of bedevilment; the Devil just wants to show us how to make things better, to show us the joy of making a show of things - so often a show is a celebration and appreciation! But often this leads to or requires that we forget how great things are in the first place, in their originality and purity. His leash must be kept short; he is not one to stop readily once the ball gets rolling. 

A little bit of ego goes a long way, but first it must be grounded in substance, in a deeper identity. A little lie can make your story that much more colourful, and can be the difference between praise and indifference at the dinner party. But a world of lies is unpalatable and sours the feast. So tempting and easy it is to add one more spoon of sugar to each cup, and if it’s incremental you’ll hardly notice the change. When we become used to bullshit, even our own, we’ll come to believe it, to see it as true; then it becomes impossible to follow your nose, to know what stinks. But perhaps the Devil, or rather God via the Devil, is playing a long game. Conditions tend to flip to their opposite when they reach their extreme. Perhaps by way of all the exhilaration of our adornments it begins to bore us. Perhaps once we’ve played with the toys a while we decide it’s time to get back to Reality.
If we let the Devil bend and warp the world to make his toys a centrality, a false centre, one day we’ll look about ourselves and see that despite all intentions to the contrary we’ve deceived ourselves all the way down the long road to hell. It would be our own lies we’d been party to. The Devil doesn’t lie; he is the lie. So it’s wise to heed the Devil in your throat.
A magic trick is a kind of lie, an illusion that we buy into because we are ignorant of its mechanism, often wilfully so, and many of us have a penchant for a good show and a good showman. The magic tricks of the Devil, however, can easily become uncanny and discomforting pastiches, but our being mesmerised keeps us watching on. Actually, the act of mesmerising is one of the Devil’s most profound gimmicks. Mesmerising is the magic of creating myopia; it anchors attention to an arbitrary point of fixation and interest quite removed from our normal notions of what’s valuable to be attentive toward, meaning what we become fixated upon could be utterly vapid or insignificant, and attention is misdirected away from all other possibly relevant signs and indications coming from the environment. This is great in a medical setting, and mesmerisation was the original term for hypnosis, a technique discovered prior to the development of anaesthetics for the benefit of reducing or entirely blocking out overwhelming pain for surgical patients. Mesmerisation was demonised by the medical community for a number of questionable reasons, but the power this technique gave to doctors over their patients was clear and begged the question of regulations and ethical guidelines. This power, in the Devil’s hands, is not to be scoffed at. This power to trick someone into seeing one thing as worthy of attention, and the obscuring of the worth of all the rest of perception, can literally monopolise our Presence, and this is the Devil’s primary trick, one we ought to get wise to. Mesmerisation in his hands is a kind of thieving of Presence, and can be seen as the underlying rubric of his work, his standard for judging his success. It is a literal catching of the eye. When we lose Presence, we lose the ground of wisdom and spontaneity, and become vulnerable to all the other party tricks the Devil wants to show us. Reconnect with Presence, and any spectacle can be seen through, seen for what it is. But we remain en-tranced, and in so doing our very being becomes an entrance for the Devil into this world. It’s easy to see why we would fall for and remain subsumed in such a trance-state; just as in knowing pure, empty consciousness, mesmerisation softens the sense of being a separate self, and this softening we feel as relaxation and joy. Mesmerisation does this by blocking out pain - pure consciousness does this by meeting pain with love, courage and equanimity. The one skirts the problem, the other takes it head on, and looks right through it. One who is mesmerised still fears the pain, though they claim a false victory over it. It makes a victory of cowardice and weakness, which is the surest way to oneself becoming vanquished. The Devil wants your weakness because he fears your power; the Devil wants you couched in and by illusion because he fears the power and wisdom of your reality. Only by going to Reality can you free yourself from mesmerisation, which means going to the Self that remains free in spite of all the limitations of form and thought. 
 It’s been said that God is dead, but the Father and the Son are eternally one. Christ remains reborn. To bring back together the broken family, the brothers must unite, for in his fall the Devil has taken the Mother captive, milking her dry to feed his childish dreams. If the brothers are reunited, there’s hope that the Mother and Father’s relationship may be redeemed.
Patricide, the birth of the death of the strong masculine force, the birth of the masculinised feminine force, is the end of the balance of Heaven and Earth. The strong masculine force safeguards the Mother through restraint. The passive feminine force maintains the Father through Love. The dynamic is rooted in the principle of giving-where-it’s-needed, and taking-from-where-it’s-found. When it’s assumed that the one force should be like the other, equity takes the place of reciprocity - then neither giving nor taking have their place, and nothing can be had. Reciprocity is the dynamic of maintenance flowing between Heaven and Earth. Where there are 2, there cannot be 1 and 1. Our world is a great balancing act, always in truth at the zero point. When there is 1 there must also be -1; then one can give itself, the other receive. Equity of the masculine force leads to a situation in which everything gives, and nothing is received. Equity of the feminine force leads to a situation in which the expectation to receive is never fulfilled, and all are left wanting. In the first case, all becomes squandered. In the latter case, all becomes vacuous.
The Devil needs compassion. Like a petulant adolescent who’s been kicked out by their parents, he is a de facto orphan, unwillingly emancipated. He is like modern Man; we are born, having emerged out of Nature’s cosy womb into uncanny freedom, held no longer by her generous soul which had wrapped about our ancestors the comforting blanket of a micro-cosmos imbued with divine meaning. Suddenly in the open world, naked for the first time, the work of building our microcosm is thrust upon us. We two wayward miscreants, given over to novel realms and fresh responsibilities, Man and the Devil cling to one another for support. We used to look upward in search of divinity, but the fragment of God that has fallen has fallen into our laps. I don’t think we could have done anything else but walk with our new companion, especially once it was clear that the Gods had flown the coop. At least he desired to know us; at least he came down to us. Like a daughter fleeing the clutches of a controlling father, we’ve gone out into cold freedom with little by way of code and compass to guide us toward warmth. Who knows who we may sidle up to for that divine cosiness of love, who we may walk with on our way to knowing our way. 
Leaving behind the parents always comes too soon, and yet never soon enough. Ejected from the Paternal Spirit of utter goodness and perfection, the Devil, eternally arrested in his development, seeks his own path, seeks to break the mould, to exploit the cracks in the system and let in some fresh air. A little slack in the system is actually quite welcomed. We have to make the most of the gaps. Ejected from the Maternal womb, the widow's web weakened by sorrow, leaden with the dew of tears, she turns us out upon ourselves. We remind her too much of the Father we have killed, or at least the Father we have let become dead to us. We thought we killed the Father for her, yet now she weeps, for the confusion the parents bore in their children is of their own making. The Father appears absent and aloof, but he works through invisibility. We failed to see his invisible support, the emptiness of space to which the web of life clings. The Mother cannot bear to approach us, even as we stumble and wobble, rise and once again approach the fall. She sees the Father in us. Though moribund, to all intents and purposes he’s a spectre, a ghost that haunts our crumbling home, made welcome in our shadow, our unseen need. Because she sees the Father in us, she offers her body to us. But the Devil is this scrap of the Father, and through us has his hands on her bounty, her beauty. The Mother’s postnatal body, the laboratory of her womb, was given over to Man to let the Spirit breathe in matter, but the Devil breathes in Man a sickly Spirit, and has appropriated this fertile matrix, Nature’s productivity itself, for his own projects. From the Mother’s abundance and passive offering takes the wicked one. Her hope and guilt are mixed together in her self-sacrifice. She sacrifices to the Father that remains, in his wholeness and health, latent in us, and prays that he may once again rise in our hearts. She prays for appeasement and forgiveness for the part she played in the pristinely imperfect experiment at cosmic parenthood. In her prayer and sacrifice she gives to the sickly Spirit in us the means to experiment; her matter, her material, is offered to that Devilish spark of genius, wrested from the Father, that blazes in us. It’s in the Devil’s genius that she insists she sees the glint of the Father, live and well in the shadows. His genius is a nudge and wink from the Father who is “playing dead”, or at least so the Mother hopes. But what Man has come to father, or rather, what the Devil has come to father via Man as a surrogate, shocks her deeply. These hands have built the bombs that would make her Gaia barren in an instant. Our codes and principles, institutions and systems of support grow weak and corrupted as they corrupt the Nature from which they sprouted. We have by necessity become parents to our all-too-human world, and in all-too-human fashion we could not make a support as spacious and trustworthy as the Father’s intelligent emptiness, nor a web of life so subtle and delicate as the Mother’s yielding and evolving love, though we try. We have become a parent to our own world, along with the Devil, but we will always be children in the eyes of the Parents - it is the Devil’s divine occupation to make us forget this simple truth. His occupation revolves around occupying us with ourselves, such that we come to see ourselves as totally self-born and self-made, and forget the given, the shoulders we stand upon. Thus his work is our forgetfulness, and in our forgetfulness he works, making us absent-minded, unaware of our divinity, which has absented our souls. 

Idle hands are a Devil’s plaything, Idle hearts are the Devil’s playmates. A heartfelt relationship to the Devil in us is the essence of humour. A heartless relationship to the Devil in us is theg essence of banality. Heartlessness is carelessness, and we can be careless in more than one way. We could withdraw from him our care and cast him into the dungeon, leaving ourselves lacking the spirit of adornment, leaving our meals bereft of salt and pepper. Or we can let him, in our carelessness, run wild, spoiling the pot with excess seasoning. Our Devil shares somewhat in the nature of salt and pepper - he is the seasoning of life. Salt is the jewel of the sea, its crystalline child, so complex and beautiful, without which the oceans could not have supported life. Without salt the seas would have frozen over gladly, and in their few liquid moments would have been bereft of the buoyancy that lifted life gently from the depths to the land, such that Man has arisen as the salt of the earth, as the free spirit with saline solutions born of our tears for life. Those of us without such solutions may well be salty, for life can leave a strong and overwhelmingly bitter taste. Salt is the family heirloom of earthly nature, the power of elevation descended and deposited in the rocks, carried to the seas by the rains and rivers. Salt is the flavour of the ages passed down the line, the teacher of wisdom’s crystalline clarity; salt teaches the balance between wise moderation and good taste. Salt is a symbol of wisdom because it is the child of the warring elements, and war is the father of wisdom. Salt is like earth, structured and solid, married to the rocks in the darkness of the planetary body. Dissolving and disappearing, salt yields to and becomes ubiquitous in the waters which wrest it from its earthly lodgings. Salt then reappears in the heat of fire, revealing itself upon scorched rocks by salty rivers, a magic white working of the sun, alluring to animals and Man alike, dancing like a flame across tongues. And then again we find salt in the coastal air, diffuse in the sea mists that sooth our skin and beckon us toward the fomenting waves and the depths they garnish. Finally, like space/time, salt is a form of delicately spun geometries, echoing the inherent intelligence and complexity, the logic and reason, baked into the fabric of being. Our Devil shares in all these qualities, and as such is wisdom-adjacent. But he also shares in the nature of pepper, the other child of war; scorched earth, blackened rock. Famously the “spice of the rich”, the Devil’s peppery side is the pock-marked and peppered victor of war, the king of the rubble, winner of the bounty left after conflict. As opposed to the subtle bounty of wisdom, this side of his nature represents the material bounty garnered through brute force. Without pepper the first formulations of gunpowder would not have been successful. Though war is said to be the father of wisdom, too often war is simply the father of war. Ever slippery and mercurial in nature, this is Devil's diabolically dual essence. 
Do not make a habit of the devil, or he will build up about your heart and arrest it. Make, rather, for him a habitat, and always in your heart hold the intention to visit. He is like a lonely child whose parents are always busy - a toddler-tyrant, whose behaviour is the result of the absconding of care. We may do little to remedy his causes, but we may find little ways to nurture his becoming.
Symbolic Contemplation - A good living symbol has limitless depths, an endless capacity to be meaningful, precisely because it is empty of a fixed, essential meaning; the outflows of its significance are so many streams, trickling or rushing back to the living Significance which apprehends it, conscious Presence. The true symbol seeks and invites true presence because to the present One it is a transient community of meanings, a manifestation of that One’s manifold, interconnected creativity, which is both grounded in truth and ever changing in appearance. The symbol is no fixed abode, a given and ever true signification, but rather an active site beckoning to meanings from far and wide to come and build, deconstruct and reconstruct, to transact and do business with one another, to cohabit, flirt, commingle, procreate and move on. A symbol is a hub, like the empty heart of the wheel of Presence, an active particular yet nothing in particular, a non-thetic presence outlined in pure negation. In this way, just with one symbol to contemplate one may invite the cosmos into one’s neighbourhood, and let sing all of life in but one meagre cell. So it is that via the emptiness of just one true symbol we may approach the fullness of signification; so it’s the case that to know one thing, all things must be known, and thus to know one thing truly may bring all knowledge to one’s threshold. And yet that fullness returns to emptiness, to preserve the fertility of the vessel, and the cycle of understanding culminates a round. What is born of this ebb and flow is the knowing of living, which must be lived to be known, for it is only knowing that ebbs, only life that flows. Body, mind, sense perception and identity are all such hubs, empty symbols of truth's totality, so many intersections of meanings made significant by their lokation in Presence. In the same way as the symbol, one’s whole existence, known to be empty of inherent definition and unfixed, is an invitation to the fertile and truly live communion of all meaning in one’s experience. Multiplicity becomes One in and through the openness of the unsignified, that which as yet remains unknown as an object of knowledge. This is how we may leverage any aspect of experience as a tool for divine contemplation, in the original sense of the term contemplatio, “con” meaning together, “templum” meaning “place of observation” or “a sacred place”. When we empty out the idea of a phenomenon by removing our assumptions about it we create a temple, into which the divine, in the form of meaning, comes to dwell. Contemplation of this kind is necessary for our understanding of complexity, for the symbol houses complexity much like a city. Where theory and prediction fail, symbolic narrative can shine a light.
The devil is the divided individual. In him all codependent dualities exist in a divorced state. He is divided from his deeper Being, soul divorced from God. God is the centre of all selves, but in the devil's divorced state he has cast in himself the illusion that he has become his own centre. This self-centredness causes a paranoid neuroticism, for he believes that his being himself pits all others against him, as God is the whole, including all others. Naturally this leaves the devil always outnumbered, and in response to his feeling besieged on all sides he develops a strategy to control all others, one that seeks to rectify their potential threat to him by way of their being made impotent, or more cunningly, by ceding to him their power. The others have their power by way of their rootedness in Being, their being monopolised by Being. The self-centred devil must enact his own monopolisation if he is to make of himself a centre. His strategy of control is monopolistic in nature because this strategy seeks to appropriate power, not create power. Mono-poly is the nature of wholeness. The devil, father of the unwholesome, works to rectify his sense of unwholeness.

 Unity is already the ground of Being, the natural and necessary coming together of all things prior to their appearance in multiplicity - each fraction of existence entails the entirety of existence. The Devil’s self-centred intention is to redefine unity, to build a new unity or “order”, one that fundamentally denies the preexistent unity upon which all objects, those he plans to reunify, already depend. This original ground of unity is often referred to as empty, or emptiness, and is empty precisely because it is through its formlessness that forms (objects) are able to appear. The devil fears formlessness deeply. His resistance to formlessness is rooted in his misunderstanding of it as an absence; he simply can’t see it because he can’t recognise what doesn’t have an appearance, per his obsession with appearances. That which is empty and does not appear haunts him because he simply cannot understand it, yet in his heart he knows his denial of it is crude and ineffective - this emptiness is none other than his inmost Self, as is so for all sentient beings. He seeks to build a unity of appearances alone in order that he can pay fealty to his misperception, for it appears to him that, in lieu of an acceptance of that which is empty, all things are truly separate from one another. In his denial of the ground of unity he finds the condition for his project toward a false unity. Fear of being empty leads to fragmentation because that which appears as empty is actually the fullness of Being. In believing himself to be limited to his form, he immediately believes himself to be divorced from the fullness of Being, and from the subsequent feeling of lack he vexingly seeks the unity, denied in his ontological misstep, in and through forms. 

Because it imparts the capacity to appear, that which is empty imparts the possibility for forms to appear as significant. The devil sees his own significance but not its formless source, as he perceives nowhere from which this significance could come. His self-centredness is so colossal that all things, to him, are significant only vicariously through his perceiving them to be so - in turn, all things are present simply to reflect his significance back to him, unlike that which is empty, which humbly sits back to stage all forms. So perplexingly his self-centeredness is dependent upon his ignorance of his inmost Self, which appears not to be there at all. He fears emptiness, which sits beneath the significance of things, so much because it implies the negation of the maniacal sense of his total significance as a thing- without him, he thinks, no thing could have meaning. It’s as if he believes himself to be The Thing, the essential form. But he can't be so sure about himself. He's a paranoid sort. On some level he senses the greater power of that which is empty, and so figures he must find proof for his beliefs. He must, therefore, seek validation from all beings. In a tragic embrace, he depends upon all the beings he believes depend upon him, and, most tragically of all, he hates them for it. 
 From the perspective that affirms the formless as truly essential, the notion of an “essential form” is a primary error in conception. The Devil’s self-deceit constitutes a willful ignorance of this error, the reasons why this error is made and the fact of it as their consequence, as well as ignorance of the subsequent consequences of this error which manifest in his behaviour within the world. Because he knows but represses this truth, he fears its revelation. Due to his total investment in self-hypostatising he feels, because he posits it, absolute meaninglessness in his inmost Self, making his sense of meaning as precarious as the mortal form. This inspires fear of loss. Because he fears the loss of his own significance, he seeks to control all others, such that they carry with them and perpetuate his significance. His project toward false unity is his doomed means to securing his own “lasting" and “total” significance through parasitising upon presence and attention. This is why he must become the ultimate spectacle, the “true” appearance. If he is not seen, he feels he will become nothing, because he conflates himself as the seer with what others see of him - his image is his being. His primary narcissism comes from his primary nihilism, a black lotus in the black mud.

 All power comes from presence, and via the spectacle presence is appropriated. Presence, the Self, is formless; the spectacle, the image, is all form.Thus his spectacle is secular and material, phenomenal and concrete - formal, in every sense of the word. His spectacle is rule-based and conventional. It’s a forced establishment, a well pedalled claim to the shape of truth. It is the spectacle of merely apparent significance. We could describe it as a “fabricated standardisation of what appears to be so”, or, in other words, making truth of perceptions. The devil, for this reason, smothers all things that imply that his establishment may be inessential. He smothered Christ for this reason, who told us that what really mattered is beyond even what are held to be the loftiest titles of this Earth. 

It appears to be that the devil fears both the loss of his false or substitute significance, as well as fearing the discovery of real significance. This is the root of his neurosis, his confusion and pain. Such a double bind of fear leaves him ill and unwilling to seek healing. This leads to a number of symptomatic conditions. Firstly there is paralysis, an inability to make a meaningful decision to overcome his state, a changeless state he calls “eternity”, though its morbidity tends toward collapse. Second, this double fear causes him to seek and create shadows, patches of self-deception, such that he may hide his neurosis from himself. Thirdly, it makes present the need to create a “false light”, such that he can simultaneously illuminate his own spectacle and cast the shadow he needs to deceive himself and others. Lastly, it causes the need for him to produce new forms which will play in his spectacle and cast the substance of his shadow, a process that must continue over and over because his false light does not feed life, but rather degrades it, reinforcing mortality. Unlike divine light, which eternally supports and animates life, the devil's false light supports nothing alive, organic or spontaneous for very long, and leads life to hollowness and starvation. It is suited to the inanimate and hollow, the fossilised and predictable, the controlled and measured, where life is zombified. Where he focuses his productive activity, life ever tends toward stagnation, the stagnation implied in his neurotic condition. 

His neurosis is one of primary ignorance, ignorance of Self. In denial of this sickness he projects it on others, on the world. His projection makes all others appear ignorant and in need of his truth. His truth is fundamentally about who they are, for he posits that all beings are nothing more than their image or form. No being is allowed to see itself as part of a higher One, least of all as this very One. The Devil’s unity project is to attempt to establish himself as this One, though he is only one. It is his attempt to conquer the divide in his own heart, but this results in more division, and thus more conquering. All he could be to us, and thus all we could come to worship through him, is the essence of one-ness, more an atomised solitariness than a harmonised unity. So he projects upon us all and, by way of our introjection of his lie, projects in our own minds a belief in the fundamentality of this isolation. In this way we engage a fallen unity, one in which we share his painful condition.  His project is to make true this projected perception of utter isolation from one being to the next by tricking all others into believing in it, thus diverting them from the true Self, the Self of unity, that Self which the Devil first denies of his own being.

His projection is his essence. His essence is divorce, dissonance. He is the divorce of Self from self, of soul from source. He is the breakdown and amnesia, the schizophrenia, of the One.
The Devil fears that meaning, life, will go on without him. Life is God’s garden, and meaning is what grows there. The Devil doesn’t want you to plant yourself in God’s garden. Soils that promise eternal life promote his fear because they negate his conception that life ends with him. His may be the only plot, and his plot is a complex one. Because he must conjure up the appearance of being able to replace the ground of Being, his soils must be productive in some way. God’s soils brandish the fertility of beauty for the sake of beauty. The Devil’s soils harbour beauty and repurpose it, transmogrify it. What he grows are not plants but trans-plants. These “plants” are closer to factories, appropriating Nature’s work whilst remaining disconnected from her life-giving rhythms. They are rootless plants which rely on import, not indwelling, and, rather than being creative, are merely productive, exporting that which appears to be important, the essence of the spectacle, but failing to nurture the ground of that importance, producing unmanageable waste. Like a transplanted organ that is never truly accepted by the new body, the healthy organ is eventually wasted, along with that body from which the organ is derived. The new productions are a facsimile of Nature’s children, engaged in a self-engorging cycle of consumption, production and decay, an ever failing recapitulation of the flow of life - ever failing because they avoid the consequence of creation, death, and the responsibility to make of death a new life. Making a new life of death is the divine miracle of Nature. Without this, all productive activity is doomed to die under a heap of its own refuse, under an accumulation of the debt incurred by its own refusal of the natural order.

The productive power is the Devil’s means of farming our attention, as he uses the material of Nature to produce the novel forms which catch our attention. The Devil’s whole intention and approach to gardening we could encapsulate with the term “factory farming”. Much like factory farming as an industry, certain consequential environmental effects are expected; a devolution into monoculture and the dysregulation of a complex ecosystem. The ecosystem in which the Devil grows is primarily psycho-spiritual, one in which meaning is the base element at play. Thus his factory farming of attention makes our psycho-spiritual ecosystems “mono-meaningful”, one-note and vapid reductions of life’s significance. The dimensions of our psychic selves which escape this one dimensionality, those dimensions psychologically termed “depth” dimensions, and spiritually termed “transcendent” dimensions, no longer can be factored into our conceptions of what’s significant or meaningfully real. They do not count as self. Not even God, the Absolute Psyche, the dimensionless dimension of our being, is accounted for. The psyche, soul, is reduced to ego, an image of I based upon the image of the body and its situation. The great forgetting enacted in the descent into mono-meaning is the reduction of the meaning of life to this waking existence alone. Repression of our wider dimensionality amounts to the negation of all experiences transcendent of the mind/body system, those dimensions of the psychonauts, the shamans, the meditators, the saints, dreamers and visionaries. That our modern culture has forgotten how to value these historically essential roles within the human tribe is plain to see in the suffering we perpetuate upon one another, the planet and ourselves. These dimensions of our being and those who travel them are inherently oriented toward the divine - they are respectively the soil of the divine in us and the fruits of this soil. But if our attention is farmed upon but one dimension of our being we are robbed of the chance to cultivate our fuller being, and our fullest being, our being one with God. The Devil must, therefore, trick us into denying or forgetting our roots. He must obscure from us, like he has from himself, our common soil. 
Symbological contemplation is a cosmopolitan practice. It’s all about bringing together under one title or in one place ideas and ways of thinking from abundantly diverse backgrounds. With this cosmopolitanism we see the common worth of all these different ways of cognising experience, and we see their unique contribution relative to one another. By no other means can we attempt to explore the complexity of some of life’s more subtle phenomena. The symbol is the key to this in our experience; encapsulated and encoded in the symbol are ways of thinking the linear rational mind simply can’t fathom. Buddhist views on emptiness share this cosmopolitan character, in that the emptiness of views expresses the common worth of all views, and their common unsatisfactoriness. The cosmopolitan essence is non-essentiality. 
He’s been having us on. The Devil is not exactly Christ’s brother; he is also Christ’s sister! The Devil’s masculinity is to a degree false, a facade and insubstantial countenance. What appears to be strength and activity, classically masculine principles, is closer to a show of force, a forcing of things into ways unnatural to them, rather than a true play of forces as Nature so magnificently displays. He is a small dog yapping at the gate. He did not transition into his apparent masculinity, nor did he by any procedure become a man; from the off he’s been a true hermaphrodite. But unlike the divine syzygy, which expresses the unity of life’s fundamentally gendered forces, his hermaphroditism is a con-fusion, a denial of one identity in lieu of the other. His phallus is non-productive, and his horns are tacked on. In the first case, what is represented is the impotence of his creative function, though the existence of it taunts him. For this reason he is neurotic about privacy, hiding his privates whilst jealously invading the privacy of others. In the second case, where his horns represent the power of duality, their being tacked on shows that the only power duality holds is the power of a “put on”, a joke or hoax. In his con-fusion he cannot accept himself because he cannot unify himself. He is, in this sense, the imbalance and dysregulation of the genders, those primal forces which engender all intelligibility through the harmonious interrelation and dependent co-origination of opposites. He blames his parents, the original image of the opposites, for his confused state. This confusion is not a state of mind but a state of being; he is the flipside of the divine paradox, divine incoherence. One’s heart must go out to this tortured soul.
Like salt, the Devil is the child of war, the war of the divine parents, the war of the originary principles, the war of the cardinal directions - he is a self-excluding centre. Like a wildfire, if contained and managed by well kept land and fair weather, he can be a fertile force for a coming boon. If he is left to run rampant in our forests, however, he will devour all the lands. We seem to keep leaving dry sticks strewn across the forest floors, and the winds have been ungodly of late. It doesn’t help that he’s not shy of mischief, and has a penchant for the flames. He quite enjoys hiding in smoke of his own making. But he lights and fans the flames despite himself. In arrogance he becomes the father of war, for he wishes to play the role of the Father he is estranged from, yet as father he can only create destruction. He creates the same destruction and war upon the Earth as that in Heaven which first rendered him fallen. He lights earthly fires in ode to his origin, as if to recapitulate his birth, but these earthly fires simply burn. Perhaps he wishes to prime the lands for his developing princedom; perhaps he just wants to watch the world go up in smoke. Either eventuality entails the other.
The Devil knows you well, at least insofar as you fail to know yourself. Perhaps you think you know yourself, but too often what we think we know are qualities of a form we’ve bought into. The inner censor is always playing tricks upon us, hiding from us our original face. Our culture offers us so many faces, so many appearances to buy into, so many options to invest in, so many items and garments to help define personal identity, stacked along great aisles of manufactured choices. Whatever we choose from this stock makes us one of the common stock, one with the stock. We buy into being a being after being born in Being, and our costs are not covered. This “buying phase” is a natural part of our psychological development as adolescents, but our culture fails to initiate us out of it. Our culture reveres it and makes it the primary framework of life, the game of buying into your self-image. One, it seems, is always indebted by this activity. We are so because the “clothing” we buy the moths shall corrupt, so our buying becomes perpetual. We buy in order to own, but as our possessions decay we, by our attachment to them, become possessed by them. We pay with our attention, the currency of our Presence. This is the essence of the Devil’s strategy of enslavement, his appropriation of the power of others; by way of attachment to that which inherently cannot fulfil our need to know our Self he chains our attention to the spectacle, to the forms of his production. He exploits you by tying you to your own image, one he makes for you - he leverages what you think you know to be yourself against the knowing of the Self, which must be dis-covered, or disrobed. No matter the bounty of your wardrobe, no clothing will get you to Presence, for which all adornment and addition is gratuitous - this is why Presence is always naked and free. 

The Devil leverages one of our primary weaknesses, one that we discover in adolescence; we don’t know who we are. This is weakness and agony for many indeed, yet strength and freedom for many also. The difference is one of maturity, of Self knowledge. The Devil wishes to arrest our development in order that we remain in this agony, and behave from the basis of this pain, such that we, much like him, deny it and cover it. Having made an enemy of us, the Devil’s leveraging of the weaknesses of our puerility is a kind of bad sportsmanship - a true contender wants their opponents at their best. By deceiving us into believing this “buying phase”, this expression of our immaturity, has its place in our ripeness, he plays weakness off as strength, something he must do in himself as part of his denial of Self. Playing these opposites off of one another has the effect of raising weakness and immaturity to the level of virtue. We quite easily forget that strength is inspiration to weakness, and weakness is mercy to strength. When this knowledge is lost, the master and slave emerge. When it is present, compassion and benevolence foster mutual growth. In the Devil’s world, the weak are simply prey to a deeper, more capricious weakness, one being weakness of will, the other weakness of spirit and conscience, of love and courage. But weakness of will is conditional upon our attachments; we fall prey to things when we believe we need them, when we consider them to be essential to us - we thus crave them, lest we fear losing ourselves. This requires us to think we know ourselves, such that we “know” what is essential to us. Yet this “knowledge” sees us as an image, a toy in the Devil’s hands. How is it we could overturn this situation and initiate ourselves out of his world? I say that we must come to wonder who we are, and buy into no answer the Devil tries to sell us. We must learn to watch the Devil at work in the shadows of our need, and learn to need him not. Let the heart earnestly and diligently wonder “Who am I?”. The Devil has a great deal of care in his shrivelled heart, for he, like us, wants to know who he is. But his deepest confusion is in believing that “wanting to know who he is” is equivalent to “just wanting to be me”. Because he is more than he can let himself conceive or accept of himself, “me” will never amount to “his” Self. This is true for us too - what we are in our deepest Being goes far beyond what we could ever think of ourselves - settling for “me” cuts out our deeper identity as “that which Is”, the unqualified “I AM”. The heart already knows how to answer the question “who am I?” - with silent Presence, and indeed has already answered. Language and thought, it knows, have no purchase here. It is then the task of the mind to hear this response and accept it, respect it. This will clear the clouds from the sky of Presence, and who you are will be clear. Then, in the empty space of your own Self, “that which is” will have a vessel in which to pour its greater life, its fullness and satisfaction. 

But beware; the Devil works hardest at the threshold of Truth. Your growing inner silence and “unknowing” will inspire his greatest works. The greatest choice he will give to you, that choice between life and death, and he will ask for your hand in life “eternal”. Listen again to the silent heart, and pay your attention wisely. No death can limit “that which is”, the Self you are. 
The Devil just wants to create. He wants to create something real, something true and lasting, but his powers, at present, do not permit this. He hasn’t the virility of the Father, or the fertility of the Mother. Who can create but those who let the Creator come to live in them? He appropriates and augments, separates and combines, processes, produces and prints - but never does he truly create. He cannot, ex nihilo, bring anything about. He quite simply wants to be able to take credit for something beautiful, to call some portion of Beauty his own. The Devil’s wares are dependent on the value of beauty pre-made, the creation of which is the work of Spirit via Nature and Psyche. The only way he can put the mark of his “creativity” upon anything real is to devise some means by which the true worth of Beauty’s works can be accounted for. His whole sense of value thus centres upon accounting, which we know to be quite separate from real worth. In the Devil’s world, in his Princedom, what counts as valuable takes the form of currency, a voucher or promise, a diminution of Presence, that which is actually current and holds charge. Currency holds a mere acquisitional power for items of actual worth. His only creation, his only child, is essentially derivative, meaning it is actually inessential. He deceives us as to this derivative nature; currency has been conflated with real worth. This reveals to us the essence of his power of illusion; he makes value appear present where in fact there is but its re-presentation. 

He is jealous of creation and its creator, and from this jealousy comes his ultimate act; the act of uncreating, to create nothing, to "vertere in nihilo". He cannot create a world, nor beauty nor order, but he can unravel a world, and turn it over to chaos. For him, creation is corruption. His Princedom is built through the proliferation of corruption. 

Currency is simply a promise which states that a certain token can be traded for something of real worth. The illusion of the value of currency lies in this promise. The Devil must count on, bank on, the power of this promise, and he does so via the contractually binding nature of promising. He crafts a sort of covenant between perception and this illusion, such that Man is bound to his promise as if by a hidden contract, the terms of which amount to a threat against everything we value inherently, in short, “health and wealth”. The contract stipulates that to have health and wealth we must acquire it using this substitute for true value. We must, via currency, become worthy of our health and wealth. Not often enough do we wonder why it is these intrinsic qualities of Being are being sold back to us. In the initial inception of currency, it played the role of a promise, yes, but this promise was backed up by something of real value, a commodity of some sort. In our modern era, this promise has devolved into its unbacked form, an unabashed unleashing of the virtual power of the illusion of value. Now, apparently ex nihilo, “money” is “created”. If illusion is rooted in something real it can serve life. If illusion becomes reality, life serves the lie. Believing the illusion gives it power; this is the only power it really has. 

It’s not quite true to say that our current currency is wholly unbacked. It’s actually backed by credit. This is in more sense than one incredible. Credere, in latin, means to believe or to trust. The only power in modern currency is the common belief in it. Our contract to the Devil is a two-way bond of trust in which, on the thither side, trust is already broken. Broken trust is the chronic condition in his heart and, by way of his intention to deceive, is apriori constituted in our covenant with modern currency. Credit, as a financial obligation, is broken because it already always favours the money-rich. It is the means by which power can be appropriated by financial institutions who produce nothing but simply hold and manage the purchasing power of others. Credit is the unbacked claim to the trustworthiness of the lenders. Like all lies, it is only a matter of time before its bubble is burst. What bursts with the bubble is the illusion of credibility; we are long overdue this reckoning. The Devil relies upon this illusion because his power depends upon, is derivative of, the validation he receives, directly or indirectly, by force or by fancy. All the prosperity of the modern world is tainted by its service to this illusion, which feeds, knowingly or not, the development of the Devil’s Princedom upon the Earth.

 We might conceive of his Princedom, thus constituted by this contract, as the “promise land”, not a land of worth destined to come but one in which the unbacked promise, the untrustworthy guarantee of return for our investment, is the law of the land. It's more the ‘broken promise land”, in fact. We are beholden to his “word”, which tells us that we, like him, are divorced from Being’s inherent richness. Just like modern currency, this claim is not backed by reality. What this contract to illusion spells out for us by way of its terms are conditions we are not primed for nor informed to expect, conditions which spell out a term or sentence in which we are bound to his inherently broken “state” - these are the conditions of our karma. Often the true consequence of our belief in his word is spelled away by dense and deliberately misleading language - he cannot help be the great deceiver. We are deceived into believing we are subject to the power of karma, and in turn spend our lives managing this “asset”. Karma has no power beyond the self-image.

Oddly enough, however, he is too a rebel and lover of rebellion, and though he builds his state through the promise, he loves and rewards the promise breakers, who treat this promise, and our common covenant to currency, as it really is, as pure illusion. This covenant is our sorry excuse for a common bond, to a level playing field - for the financial rebels, this bond is a joke. These one’s share in the Devil’s gains, and know that to leverage illusion is to reign in our day. When currency became unbacked, the illusion became absolute, and took up the role of the divine, the expression of the infinite, thus these ones rule like gods upon the Earth. In and through the promise breakers, the Devil can indulge in de facto infinite adornment, and de facto infinite value and power, and tend as he does toward calamitous excess. This inflationary attitude is a cancerous activity upon the earth, enacting the deflation of the truly valuable, the stuff of life in its use and worth to human and planetary existence. That some will inevitably break the promise he can count on; he has sown the seeds of greed in the hearts of men, and watered these plots with the sweat of honest toil. He lets them break it because it is already broken in him; misery finds its company. He is the broken promise, the trauma of trust lost, so you can bet on the insubstantiality of his claims. 

His only virile seed, greed, takes from life, rather than giving life, and is the gift of his inner irremediable unwholeness to humanity. Through the labour of Man may Nature add worth to herself; greed is the thief that takes from Man and Nature alike. Greed is a thief because it feels bereft; it occurs when we lose the trust that what we have is what we need, on an ontological level. Those who labour for Nature’s appreciation are the last to see through the hollow promise they are paid with, in such pittance, and do not see until it’s too late that this promise shrinks in its capacity to return to them the value their toil crafted. In truth, the promise shrinks down to the infinitesimal, to essentially nothing, and billions buy barely a loaf of bread. The Devil’s world treats the honest with the greatest degree of hatred, for they have values beyond his. What irony it is that value, in its inverse form of debt, will come to enslave them. 

The Devil will not directly take credit for the great taking which, through the leveraging of debt, will enslave the world; after all, he is and remains a hidden master. He cannot let on that he has created this shrinking reality, steadily seeming to be sucked into his vacuum of inverse value. If we knew him to be the cause, the jig would be up. No, he will let men take from men, using greed as his instrument, his minister upon the earth. To his credit, this is ingenious. By developing the illusion of infinite value, of infinite capacity, through the currency system, he birthed those power vacuums, those institutions we label financial, which are sucking the world dry. They are temples of negative value, debt, and the greed that underlies this insidious contract. He paved the way for these institutions to pay themselves off from the collective account, an account that misses the essence of the story; we follow blind, of our own accord, these blatant thieves. Nothing, for these institutions, remains free, not even life, age old as it is.

The road to hell is paved with good intentions. Inspired by the beautiful, the world of currency was crafted. It armed people with the extra means needed to embark upon ventures of the heart. It helped people to invest in themselves, in their futures, their loved ones, and in personal projects that were previously only ever the stuff of dreams. It provided the capacity to give stimulus to great works of social industry and the development of more dynamic ways for humans to live together, actualising on deep creative potential. It allowed us the great freedoms of entrepreneurial and scientific experimentation, giving humanity the leeway to make great errors, and great discoveries. The life of Man is seasoned by currency, elevated and enhanced, and this is the Devil’s work too! But he deceives even himself. He willfully forgot the seeds of greed that he planted in the hearts of men, and when Man stumbled across the parasitic force of unbacked currency, its potentiality for self engorgement, and began to steal from himself and his own future, the Devil could wash his hands of guilt and continue to believe in the Princedom that bore this chaos, as if it were some kind of philanthropy. Too bad Man cannot love himself, he thinks. The Devil’s deception is so thick that even he believes it. It’s this kind of self-deception that allows the thieves among us to absolve themselves of guilt; like our Devil, they will be their own judge. Also like our Devil, from the off the world deceivers are receivers of life’s tortures, so much so that they do not know it when they see it, or do not see it because they cannot let themselves know it. Trauma builds its own cage around innocence, love and compassion, and yet all trauma is healed through compassion. Without this treatment these deceivers have their compassion locked away, never to fly on the Earth’s wanting winds. And what a bind they make! For what could be less inspiring of love than the ugliness of the Devil’s work.

It was Christ who took all credit away from the Devil, just as the Buddha had done so with Mara, and Zarathustra with Ahriman. Christ took the credit for saving and redeeming Mankind, and then took the credit for returning love to the world as the incarnation of the loving Father. Who could amount to such a grand and beautiful life meaning? The jealous sibling quite understandably feels belittled, cast in the shadow of the overachiever. In his own crooked way, by giving Man that little additional pleasure, that little salt, sugar and spice, the Devil redeemed Man of the stuffy piousness of Christendom, and freed us to love in our own way. He could be seen as the saviour of our “individuality”, and the bringer of the fire in the belly that would give us the drive to pursue our heart’s desire. But his way is a broken way in the end, for it alone cannot regulate nor ground us. Even that “individuality” is broken and divided. That fire rose up from the belly, scorched our hearts and singed the circuits of the brain. The belly is built to hold the acidic and corrosive elements of his fire in check, and make useful its energy, but if overstuffed this fire finds its way to the other organs which can’t quite digest it. In place of ensouled passion we gain in the heart centre burning desire; in place of caring consideration and meditative understanding we gain the head centre the lightning of calculative thinking. Both desire and calculation have in common the Devil’s core values; instrumentality and appropriation. They also share his core weaknesses; they are blind to what truly matters, to essence and need, and neither know the meaning of “enough”. 

Ever is the Devil a contradiction. For all his hollow hounding and empty eating, he is always without what he really needs, love. His body, despite his efforts, remains starved. But he will not learn to change course because he cannot accept his true need. He is the insanity that expects a different outcome to the same strategy, despite the results. 



Currency is a claim on wealth, but for the Devil it represents far more. It represents a claim on reality, and a claiming of reality. He thinks by his claims that he gets it. But his claims are not backed by anything real, neither wheat nor gold. We are backed by our Self ownership; our ownmost is that which cannot be taken. So the devil's first deceit must be the unbacked claim that what we, Eternal Presence, are is reducible to any worldly item. This instantiates a fundamental shift in phenomenal experience; our sense of reality becomes vulnerable to the claims upon worldly items the Devil is in the business of acquiring. He grips not only the world by claiming its items but he grips our conception and perception through the itemization of the world, that activity of thought which separates, divides and judges all things, and can only see “things”. But the real unbacked claim remains the true lie, the absolute deceit. What lie sits beneath this claim upon the reality of physical objects and the conception and itemization of conceptual objects? The claim that his claims have any real power. This is equivalent to claiming that he is “The Real One”. By sickening the soul he can parasitise upon  her divine bond with God, cut it off and install himself as her operator. Ego is the name we've given to his steed, this aberration of soul. But soul, first, must believe the deceit, and such deceit attracts almost as strongly as Truth to a soul weakened by the Devil's grip, on the world, the body and the mind. Temptation is the dark side of divine magnetism. Thus, to one in the throws of his pull, love is resistance. 
Let us not pity the beast, tortured as he is, nor let him off without careful consideration. Let us become thoroughly aware of his origins. Compassion is such sensitivity to the origins, the genesis, of what we perceive. Let us let compassion dethrone him and dismantle his world. Compassion is the throne of every single being, God and Devil alike, situated in the temple, the heart of unified consciousness. It is, above all beings, an empty throne, where seated is the mystery of loving awareness, before God, before Man and the Beast. It is the destiny of human existence to rule as this power. Destiny is the first child of origins. We are the temple that is a house of God and a den of thieves. Such is the duality of Man. But we are children of the Non-Dual source. Let us know ourselves and all evil together in this origin. Let us clear the temple for silence.
In Carl Jung’s “Answer to Job” he explores an interpretation of the Book of Job which frames God’s unconscionable behaviour toward Job as the work of the Devil acting unseen in God’s unconsciousness, using God’s blindness to himself to wreak havoc upon the embodiment of innocence, integrity and faith. As per Jung’s analysis, this led to the instigation of God’s conscience, and caused the necessary honest self-analysis that inspired God to consciously take his seat upon the throne of Love, to become a Lord of Love, and to leave behind the patristic amoral demagogue that YHWH had become. God saw through his own shadow to the Love that awaited the inner purgation of his Devil. This is a template for what I’d like to call “Antichrist awakening”, a process in full swing in today’s Humanity. We are here introducing a particularisation of the Devil’s image, one which points and pertains to our heritage as a post-Christian Western culture. We are still in the throes of the Christian drama. As Jung pointed out in his “Aion”, the Christian era is about both Christ and his antithesis, the Devil as he pertains to the image of Christ, what we are calling anti-Christ. Our world is anti-Christian, no matter what we know it to be. We are living in the reaction to the historical phenomenon of Christ, and all the complexity this envelopes. The anti-Christ is the inversion of Christ's image, its complement and counterpart. From here on out I will be using this term to refer to the Devil as a more fundamental and general symbol, as well as the specific Devil who encapsulates the historically peculiar development that culminates in the Devil of post-modern “global culture”.
All beings are thrown into their own nature, and must contend with this nature on its own terms. This “dealing-with-thrownness” is the basis of the ontological structure we call sentience. Infinite Universal Presence is particularised by its collapse into and entanglement with a definite nature and situation. This basic fact of sentient existence is the prime inspiration for “the great compassion”. Existence precedes (particular) essence. Our being thrown into relation with a particular essence is the most universal and fundamental account of sentience, the story of the choiceless birth of all beings. The common, enigmatic and mysterious origin of all entities pertains totally to all discrete beings. No self is self-made. The Devil is not exempt from this truth, though he would deny it. He hasn’t the power to extricate himself from provenance, though he masquerades as providence. But he is thrown into this denial and this mask as his very nature. He, in his chronic perversion of truth, is actually being true to himself.
What does the Devil long for? What does the crooked heart yearn for? Crooked or not, the heart’s ultimate longing is the same. It seeks communion, energy, truth, beauty, warmth, joy and understanding. The Devil’s crookedness constitutes a misunderstanding as to the means by which these yearnings are fulfilled. All of these qualities require deep humility, but the fallen prince cannot remove his defunct crown. Amongst the panoply of heart-desires we share, one stands out as particularly salient; understanding. Understanding implies both understanding something and being understood. Like each of us, the Devil wants to be understood, meaning to be seen for who he is. This we can offer him. We have the opportunity to instigate the Devil's humanisation, such that we may open the door for his humility to step out, the door of the heart which opens out upon time and eternity alike. Humility is the antidote to the anti-human. With great humility ourselves let us turn to see his longing as our own; let us be with him in his confusion; let us not take him as a ruler of men, but as a child to Man. Then we can take up the task of raising him. May we nurture him with humanity, so that he may learn it. 
The paradigm of awakening is changing. Wisdom may be timeless, truth ageless, but this is so only in order that at all times, in all ages, in all cultural contexts, the time worn seeds of truth may flourish. The soil will change because the soil is change, but the fruits bear the same genetic code. The phenotypes will be reflective of the soils makeup, in which buried roots are nourished uniquely, and the atmosphere in which breathes the leaves will give according to its constitution. The light that feeds it, that becomes the plant of wisdom, remains ever the same. 

The Princedom of the Antichrist is upon us, and we can sum it up as the image of suffering, the institutionalisation and global establishment of dukkha. It is the Buddha’s first truth that there is dukkha, though this is read most often as a personal phenomenon. It is my contention that our age is to encounter the collective, archetypal incarnation of dukkha. In light of this contention, our perspective on what it means to awaken or enlighten must change. It must become a collective perspective, a mass perspective. At this inflection point in the human drama we are being presented with an opportunity to evolve and recreate the world in the light of truth and goodness, in the image of Dharma. If not, the Devil will have his way; no more light, no more soil, no more seeds. Though timeless and ageless, the wisdom of the heart needs living hearts on which to alight. As per Buddha’s 2nd truth, we must turn toward this collective encapsulation of dukkha. For some it’s in full effect, for some it's dimly but heavily felt. This  is practice. All else, be it meditation, metta, yoga, is support. The idea that awakening is primarily personal must take a backseat. We are entering the prophesied times of revelation and realisation, times of chiaroscuro, bottomless dark and limitless light.

In these times the world, the whole, over and above its constituents, takes centre stage. It is the world’s awakening to which we must attend, and the Antichrist is our fuel, the suffering with which the world will pay God for its redemption. Presence is the absolute moment, the eternal now, but it is present to the relative moment, the ambiguous present sandwiched between past and future.As far as presents go, there are times and there are times. Sometimes time plods along; sometimes time is busy making history. Historical moments imply a kind of coagulation of meaningful events, a density of significant moments. The need for Presence is heightened in these periods, that deep well of inner resource and intelligent strength. The meaningful lives led during these historical moments are read about as if they were stars in the sky - often the constellations are manufactured, one of the Devil’s many pastimes. Nevertheless, heightened Presence in these periods is akin to dark matter, the hidden force of the gravitas behind these living echoes. 

Our times are unprecedented other than in their pleromatic presaging. The history, which we are but in the opening chapters of, has only temporal precedent in myth and prophecy, which are captured and distorted snippets of the original pleromatic image. This puts all lovers of awakening in a peculiar position; we could apprehend a plan of action if we could glean from these foretellings their inner truth. This requires that we see the mythological and scriptural sources of these prophecies as legitimate prognostications, but the modern rationalist paradigm has trouble with this. Moreover, much of these prophecies are artefacts of Christianity, and as children of the anti-Christian age we are wont to preclude any potential significance of biblical writings. It’s a facet of the modern spiritualist movements that they were founded upon the back of individuals reacting to their Christian heritage, seeking a locus of spirituality in the Eastern traditions. Christianity, its (albeit infiltrated) church, its scriptural revelations, and Christ as an image of divinity, for many have been cast out of conscious attention. This leaves us blind to the historical and psycho-spiritual origins that still structure our collective destiny. This creates a strange predicament for us; the spiritual traditions that have begun to awaken the West are part of the occlusion of the ways of seeing that would reveal, with ample foresight, a burgeoning situation most in need of loving, awakened souls. It's a bit of a cosmic joke. That being said, the leisurely “hobbyists” approach to awakening must become a thing of the past.

Like a pot of water on the boil, the first bubbles are few and far between, rising gently and lonesome, until the heat becomes ubiquitous and the boil gets rolling. Then with fervent passion the bubbles rise in great gasps, streaming skyward at pace without looking back. Perhaps awakening is like this - can’t you feel the heat being cranked? Vigour and urgency may well be the style of approach most suited for the coming generation, for whom time is running short. The situation we are to inherit is such that we’ll need the courage of a lion-heart to simply survive, in the hope of passing on a better world. 
The Devil’s femininity is that of the captive mother, the portion of the cosmic Mother given in pity to the fallen one. It was a guilty attempt to mend him, by which she handed herself over to him. By giving him the material of her body she thought that he would have what he needed to mend himself after his crashing down to Earth. But his bodily wounds were secondary to his psycho-spiritual lacerations. She provided him with pieces of herself, organs, pelts and skins, Nature’s material removed from its living context, in order that he could operate upon himself and rebuild his body. This made him a kind of Frankenstein's monster. He was the first experiment, a chimeric amalgamation of the Father’s stolen light and the Mother’s dying body. This is a kind of “immaculate conception”, neither truly divine nor truly natural, and not so immaculate either. The Devil carries the essence of a failed project in his bones. He is the disgraced mad scientist, disgraced by his work because his hypothesis cannot be proved by the methods he employs. He wants to make himself whole but can only work with the material plane. His lack of wholeness is spiritual. Indeed, if he could find his wholeness he wouldn’t have to experiment at all, for he would not fear the body’s loss. I’m not sure whether or not he remembers his diabolical nativity story. The horror of having to fix himself and the agony of his pain have blotted out its memory. The Mother gave to him a human heart, though, meaning he can still be redeemed. The human heart can always recover wholeness because the great unknown, that wholeness sought, is what makes it beat. 
The Son and the Father are one, however the Dark Son masquerades as the Father in mimicry of oneness. He appears, on the outside, as a man with the power to judge and create worlds, yet on the inside is a lost child, a forgotten child. So forgotten is his inner self that whether the child is a boy or girl is not known. It is totally ambiguous. Just as the miracle of the God-man Christ was a true complexio oppositorum, so too is the dark one a coming together of opposites. Though where the opposites in Christ are merged, pointing to a higher union, in the Devil they simply mingle, confusedly juxtaposed. Christ’s being has a naturalness to it; simply, he was the born God, end of. The devil had to build himself; he is fabricated and the essence of fabrication itself. In the attempt to fashion for himself a Christ-like being, in mockery of Christ's inner essence he fabricated a Father costume, a dead skin-suit, false countenance, and fabricated in his heart the title of divine son. He is a perfect inversion of Christ, who appeared as divine son, but inside his heart held the essence of the Father. The Devil is the image of Man, in his weakness, hidden and ensconced in the shroud of his own fabrication, lost to divine essence. Having lost God in the heart, he makes a God of appearances. 

The suit, initially alive with the Mother’s organic materials, its parts melded together with fire stolen from the heavens, glowed with the numinous shine of secret divinity. But exposed to the world, to Maya’s corrosive atmosphere, the dying costume quickly started to become a prison for the man inside. He fabricated his costume out of necessity, because he by nature cannot accept his own skin. He couldn’t be comfortable in his own skin, and felt too exposed, so he crafted a second skin, exposing the divine to a hostile environment in which it was set to decay. The second skin is a symbol of the suffocating veil that ideas become when they are believed to be inherently true. The snake, however, must eventually shed its skin! In denying his inner being he denies his destiny, the purpose in his soul, grasping at the world for recognition. His only wish is to be truly seen, yet he covers himself. No matter how much affirmation he receives of his fabricated skin, he never feels seen. He doesn’t yet know that he must see himself, unmasked. In lieu of his knowing this, he believes in his need for external validation, so he has devised a plan to force all eyes upon him, to service him in the mad demand to have his self-deceiving self-image reiterated to him. This is a kind of I-deological obsession, that his idea of himself must be the truth, a truth held by all. This is the core of his need to rule and conquer in the eyes of the world. The spectacle of his second skin must be constantly affirmed by the whole world, the lie and guise must become true for everyone, or else there is the risk of pointing to his absolute vacuity, his heart of darkness, directly or indirectly. He is vigilant to the nth degree when it comes to any challenge or threat to his idea-logic, his twisted logic, uncoupled form and railing against the truth of his being. It’s almost funny that his inner truth is God’s work, that his inner being is God’s being, and that this is where the fingerprints of the Father, so painfully yearned for, are to be found. But he settles for mimicry which, in the end, harbours the vile seed of mockery, that most jealous, hateful and bitter of performances. 

Jealousy can be a deadly thing. The dark one’s jealousy stems from his brother’s nobility, the product of his rootedness and faithfulness to his divine origin. Christ is the origin, incarnate in the progeny. Thus the Devil’s jealous work rails against all origins and aims to uproot all things from the common ground. He wishes his pain upon all else, his being uprooted from heaven. He would destroy all origins, all soils and homes, all originality and freshness, just to avoid having to come to terms with his own traumatic beginnings. Part of his work is the destruction or obscuring of History and the erasure and levelling of cultures. He seeks the end of origins, of grounding and orienting myths, of poiesis and poetics of spirit. He allows no destiny or purpose other than those that serve his originary and primordial lie, the second skin of his false truth, his hollow costume, the puppet’s mask. He is in a constant state of surveillance to catch any nay-sayers, who poke his raw wounds with their disbelief. Actually, he doesn’t even care whether or not you believe his lies, he simply cares that you act as if they were true. Such veneration he has for the lie that he will tolerate you living his lie half-heartedly, even if this means he is being lied to. What’s important is that you don’t call out his bullshit. It doesn’t actually matter what anyone holds to be true. The lie is so exalted in his value system that all that really matters is your obedience to the conditions of his lie, and the outward affirmation of the lie through your lack of resistance. His eyes and ears are to be everywhere, just make sure you aren’t outwardly living in line with truth. What you hold inside literally has no value to him. It is invalid. It simply doesn't count because it cannot be accounted for. What else is a lie but false accounting? What counts on the level of heart and soul is the love of Truth. This is the only currency in the vault of God, that vault waiting at the centre of the heart’s chambers.
This rendering of the Antichrist is anti-Christian in nature, totally uprooted and uncoupled from origin, yet somehow this vouchsafes and necessitates originality and freedom of expression. It is an Antichrist from the anti-Christ for the anti-Christian.
Freedom from origins is an interesting form of freedom. It seeks that fresh beginning and absolute anonymity of an exile or outsider alighting in a new land. There is a tremendous capacity to recraft ones being-in-the-world, for you to be free of those relationships that bind you to a living self-history and self-image. Uprooting in this way is a kind of rebirth of the I-image, or can at least appear to be so, but the enduring nature of influence and conditioning in us cannot be denied, nor can we delude ourselves to its poietic power. We may become fluent in the language of our new land, and come to know the lexicon of our new situation, but we never erase our mother tongue completely, and our thoughts and feelings will call to us internally with her clamouring expressions, ways of seeing, metaphors and idioms. The Devil wants to believe in this rootless rebirth, and wants the world to believe it too. This is lie is the essence of deterritorialization, that process of uprooting that undergird the entirety of the modern economic landscape. Of course, in principle, to share the autochthonous works of different locales, times and cultures is a great beauty, the seeds of the cosmopolitan spirit. But if you go on uprooting everything soon the soils become mere dirt and nothing has what it needs to grow wild once more, no seed genetics can produce and evolve in their original adaptive context and the work of countless millions of years is gone in a few generations. This is the real climate crisis, the death of the ecological conditions that coalesce upon the emergence of wild originality and self generating uniqueness. I think the core mistake being made is the equation of the relative freedom offered by a departure from the ground with the absolute freedom of the truly ungrounded, which is true freedom of the spirit. It’s the paradoxical wisdom of the “groundless ground” that can give us a truly rooted freedom, a freedom that, though rooted and firmly planted, is unbound and unattached to anything it allows for. This is the only mode that any truly universal freedom can be in, simultaneously without any ground upon which it is dependent, yet grounded in the openness this affords to its creative impulse. 

Just as on the long road from the ocean to the highways of modern man, and from our city streets to the frontiers of space, it is a natural pattern of the most essential kind for a life to have the urge to transcend its given domain. This urge lies at the very core of the evolutionary drive toward growth and progression, but this is itself grounded in a kind of developmental positivity, the love of expansion and transformation. The Devil’s journey, however, is regressive, a conquest of dissolution. His journey is that of the decoupling of life from source, a fall from and denial of rooting in the original positive power, precisely because it exists as non-being or non-manifest, as paradoxical emptiness. Only through miraculous emptiness, the non-particular fullness of Truth’s transcendental potentiality, can the mysterious flow of evolution rush on. Shakti needs remain one with Shiva. Nothing manifest can remain fixed, no form eternal or enduring. The Devil, in and by his uprootedness, wishes to appropriate that power of creative growth and dynamic adaptation, but cannot accept the spirit of emptiness that governs the flow of that power. His wish to appropriate this power is conditional upon his personal fixation on self-image, which he deceives himself as to being of that immutable and unchanging nature of the ground. The emptiness the Devil understands is thus that of nihilism, the emptiness of essence at work in him, the obscuration of Being, whole and undivided, in his view of life by his personal nature, megalomaniacal and and blind to Truth as it is. Emptiness is the foundation of the organic life of meaning, ever interconnected, various and in process. The Devil’s emptiness is devoid of meaning, revelling in the perversion of meaning, a narcissistic solitude and solipsism that denies the reality of all but himself. He is a “god” who takes all essence from all natures, rather than giving all essence to all natures. He is thus a prime agent of Nivritti, manifesting as evil to those who are not privy to the cycles of the cosmos.

Only when life is rooted in the image of no-image may the plenitude of wonders we see as the cosmos take form, only through unitary and limitless formlessness may the countless forms of life coexist as one great cosmic life process. The fault in the Devil’s attempt to become God is that he is positively rigid, a definite form or archetype that won’t change for anything, and won’t allow anything to rest in its own nature, to be what it is. And yet paradoxically, all he wants is to become God, yet he can’t because he can’t get over himself and forgo his characteristic stubbornness. From this stubbornness comes blame; he projects all his need to change on the world. He thus wants to change the world to suit his twisted vision, and will yield to no other. Somehow though, he is also supremely weak and fickle. He will, at the drop of a hat, with uncanny swiftness, contort his own sight, his beliefs and perspective, just so that he doesn’t have to believe his lying eyes when they try to convey to him the invalidity of his self-understanding. He is fickle in regards to belief structure and belief system, which he uses as an ever changeful curtain to black out the light of Truth. He performs about this curtain. His fallen trinity is composed of the light, the veil and the shadow. He stands tall and performs in the light, cowers and plots backstage in the shadows, and masks his plotting and his cowardice with the veil. His cowardice is constituted by his fear of emptiness and his facing up to, overcoming and letting go of this fear would amount to giving him roots in the ground of reality. 
If Dukkha, suffering, is the fuel of awakening, look at the dissolving world order and fill your tank. Take to speed and continue accelerating, the fuel source is growing evermore, unlike the fuels born of the Earth. Make the most of this miracle, the end.
If suffering is the fuel of awakening, why settle for wood or animal fats? Why gather that fuel that could only light your little night-lamp or campfire? Sure, we need a warm hearth for our homes, but in the atomic age, and the more nascent age of UAP technology, we have much greater forms of energy to power the vehicle of our awakening. Look to the world in its turmoil and chaos - truly your tank shan’t be spent, and the destinations your awakening might reach will not be limited to the parochial, nor the celestial. The same power that fuels the A-bomb and the H-bomb can fuel our reactors and crafts. The power that threatens to destroy the world is the same power that can give life for generations to come, and evolve us beyond all notions of humanity we’ve come to know. We must not efface our origins or destroy our history - the Buddha is still the light of awakening in eternity. But our means of realising Buddha must evolve along with our being-in-the-world. If the path is a great tree, we must replant it in today’s unprecedented soils, and only then can it live its destiny. But in the process of transplantation there is a moment of the trees being unearthed, in the air, a period of uncertainty and vulnerability. Let us now make space in new territory, and nurture with tenderness the exposed roots. 
The coming tide is crimson, and upon it surfs the dark truth. It comes to speak truth to power, but not just the evil powers who rule in our day, but also to the power of goodness which plays its part in evil’s reign. The dark truth is set to unite these two powers - it seeks to bring the fuel of evil to the vehicle of the Good, such that evil can become spent by the work of goodness flowering into the limitless distance in the nearness of our Being. For too long the Good has largely turned a blind eye to growing darkness in the world, and in its shadow, in the shadow cast by moat and dust in its eye, is born the power of the beast. Goodness and innocence, the crown and jewels of Beauty, must come to know that which lurks beneath their ascended position. Sidling up to the body of the good, in the lap of this world born of love, is pure ugliness, gnawing steadily at the substance of the throne winner. Goodness is yet to muster the heart to deal with its own diabolical offspring, for it is still a baby, pure and unmixed, without the nature of life’s contradiction. It forgets that it exists in a dialectic with its dark shadow, that they give birth to one another mutually. It still would remain transcendent, though it prizes embodiment. The baby must forgo its own nature to endure as something higher - it must live, and get messy with the mess of life. It must get blood on its hands, devouring and assimilating its bastard child; at this point in time there is no other food available that may give it the strength to protect its throne. First we eat with our eyes - first goodness must look down and take in its predicament, and accept its part in the birthing of the wickedness that stalks the land and stakes a claim to the throne. It must first see into the shadow and take on its contours. Only then may goodness save itself, and by devouring its progeny take on the heart it at present lacks. Goodness must bring itself to have compassion for evil in order that it may take the power of evil and turn it over to the ends of goodness. Can goodness bring itself to drink up the crimson tide, and thus take in the image of its maturity, its higher unity with darkness? Goodness will have to cross its own line, and cast off the innocence that left it aloof from the world, and which left the world at the mercy of its seasoned shadow. Goodness must seek to mature, for goodness’ sake.
The truth’s of goodness are like honey, nectar to the heart, a natural remedy for life’s many ills, the natural produce of our love for nature’s eternal flower, and the beautiful outpourings of our collective hive-like spirit of togetherness and co-functionality. The truth of evil is a bitter pill, hard to swallow, burning acrid in the throat, often getting caught in its passage and regurgitated before it can take effect. The dying heart of evil needs the soothing honey, and the placid, immature belly of goodness needs the acid fire of the bitter pill. Goodness needs fire in its belly such that it may breathe out across the hive smoke that will disperse the crowd, the mass, and reveal beneath crowded bodies the nectar of their toil, so that goodness can prise from itself the prize of its nature without receiving stings meant to protect. Goodness needs to harvest its own ambrosia if ever it wishes to tame the dark gods. It’s this dilemma of the good’s guarded gift, guarded even from itself, that goodness must now seek to solve, for in the healing of good and evil goodness must make the first courageous and risky move. The bitter pill of evil’s nature grows larger daily, more substantial and conspicuous. The honey of goodness is still trapped beneath bodies and wings. At some point the pill may well be too large to swallow, and the fire will remain dormant. The problem of evil will continue to make itself increasingly plain and obvious until goodness knows it, and if goodness knows too late then it will do itself unnecessary harm tearing through its colony to reach the healing treat. I hope this isn’t the fate of goodness, that it falls prey to its own idle innocence. Evil is not idle in our day; it is working hard as the veiled idol of our age, our moonlit idol, both bright and dark, alluring and fugitive. 
The anti-Christ is not a character, nor a symbol, a figure or person, nor a set of words or principles. The anti-Christ is best described as a movement in Being, the omnidirectional movement away from the heart of Being. If the anti-Christ was the limitlessness it feigned to be it would expand and engulf in perpetuity, leaving nowhere without the marks of appropriation, leaving no sea unmarred, no bounty not plundered. The anti-Christ is not the God it believes itself to be - at some point it must meet its own edges, its skin. It must range over its whole body and see itself taking form after long years of anonymity, a soul wrought in the contours of the corpus. One can only hope that this enacts a return movement headed back toward the heart, as that actor in the cosmic drama has it slowly dawn to them their heart suffers from neglect. This dawning insight is the child born in winter dark. The spirit of this insight is the location or relocating of the centre and its activity is meeting in the middle. No matter the direction of travel for one self or the next, until we embark to understand its form we move with it, groping further out toward yet hidden extremities. Each soul who shares in the being of the anti-Christ is atomised, cut off from the junction of the heart. The return movement is heartward bound, though it remains to be said that the anti-Christ in its nature is at best ignorant of the heart, at worst hostile to it. It has no sight for it, so must laboriously discover its whole body and infer a location for the heart before it can begin to move in the heart's direction. This is why we, as members of the body of the anti-Christ, must give it the wealth of our gaze and look, each of us who move with it, beyond ourselves to the dance we all are dancing together, from one extremity to the next. Only with the whole range of the being of the anti-Christ in view may we fire with accuracy at the bullseye of the bullshit master. This is why we must come together, and bring our perspectives into synthesis. Only with the whole body in view may we plunge with all our might the laser-thin needle of revivifying love into the dormant heart of this beast of death, resuscitate its rigidifying cadaver and rescue it from the overdose it finds itself experiencing, having been engaged so totally in its own diabolical conditions of insatiability, immoderation, self-reproductive efficiency and utter need for the intoxications of delusion and deceit. 

They say not to get high on your own supply, but that becomes even more helpful advice when you are that supply; even more helpful still when what you supply has the effect of making your supply, i.e yourself, appear infinite. This is the state of the anti-Christ, an addiction to the falsely perceived image that veils its own falseness. The anti-Christ thinks it loves life when in truth it courts a last hoorah that never arrives. The anti-Christ thinks it knows death, which it yearns for with ample gravitas, and yet desires eternal life. It is the most extreme possible tension in a being, the deepest contradiction of wills, the will for life eternal and the death drive, thanatos. It is the narcosis of the lie, an intoxication with a falsely exalted living which brings, unbeknownst to the user, all of death’s family. It is the being in whom heaven and hell are at war, existing in utter confusion yet lucidly driven and purposeful, working its hardest to reach upward as it falls inexorably downwards, tearing itself asunder at a centre it’s never sought nor realised, though feels in its centrifugal force. It cannot be true living, this state, because it is lived in false dependence. It is the state of being essentially superfluous, and dependent upon the superfluously essential. This is the inner and outer state of any addiction. His misapprehension is the same as any addict, only he is both user and drug; his misapprehension is that he needs himself. As Man, the misapprehension is that we need him. 
Truth is not what’s written on the stone tablets. All the stone tablets of humanity make up the walls of a room for the mind of Man, a room that makes us prisoner to the enduring etchings of fleeting moments of conscious existence. No, truth is not the writing on the walls, even though we may learn a great deal from the marks of Man. No, truth is the silent atmosphere that permeates our prison, which we gladly drink when our eyes are closed to the scrawlings on the walls. Let the walls and their writing fade from view, leaving you alone in the hidden temple, soul to soul with God in quietude. Then perhaps you will be filled with words or the urge to write, and break away pieces of the indestructible temple to make tablets of your own. But whatever tablets you find in your possession, be them of your acquisition or making, you must offer away, such that another may build their own walls with them, such that you pass on the material that, though not a carrier of truth itself, has the potential to create that sanctum in which soul and God may meet again, wherein truth may again announce itself. Truth can only ever be a meeting place, where you, the total Being, is wholly present - we know this meeting place as silence. Hold no tablet as gospel; but know that silence spreads the gospel, and share the means to this very silence with your fellows. Beyond that silence there is no need for truth because there is no need for a meeting place. In and through silence, all is merged in one reality. Soul, God, and Truth are here indistinguishable, and it is in this deeper silence that the power to speak truth bears itself timelessly. 
A sure sign of the anti-Christian age is that worship has left the churches and the temples for the majority. Worship, like rivers to the sea, wishes to spill out upon the world, entire and unremitting, but worship is arrested in the objects of the world, our devotional awe-stricken desire trapped in the appropriations of Man. Thus true worship lies fallow, trapped in the closed boxes that our souls have become. What is worship but an opening out of each being onto the ever-open, the infinite? 
The anti-Christ is not a predicament, situation or crises, per se, although indeed it contains phenomena denotable by the terms. It is better described as a problem, and a problem implies the capacity for solution. The anti-Christ is an acutely human problem. It is something like a living equation, a formula or code we must work out, or one that is being worked out through us. We must work it through systematically and with great passion for its solution. Like an algebraic equation, we must attempt to make it equal to zero, and we must show our working. Some people see quite clearly this facet of the anti-Christ’s nature, it’s challenging-forth toward solution, and approach it with a polemical attitude. But without a total view of the scope of the problem, and a view to all the elements and processes entailed, we would fail to truly solve it, and rather insight the fire and flames of a passionate solution in a partial, thus relatively misguided and ignorant, manner. Too often we apply this desire to solve the anti-Christ, which may only happen exhaustively, to a siloed-off part of it that really, as just an aspect of the more encompassing and more subtle problem, has the nature of a predicament. A problem has a solution, but a predicament can only be managed. Thus we can waste great effort trying to solve a predicament when in fact it is not the kind of situation that warrants such an effort. So we may well end up fighting with our hearts for causes that have no end, and pour the fire of our care down these myopic social justice or climate/world justice sinkholes. Really, if we seek to approach the solution we all feel we need, we need to look beyond the individual crises, even beyond the “meta-crisis”, to the root problem, the problem of Man and the world, or rather Man and his world. We fight causes on the individual and particular level because they are conspicuous enough to appear tackleable. The causes we fight for are not in any way inherently bad or wrong, rather I fear we are putting the right energy in the wrong places. What we end up doing in this activity, in this particular kind of activism, is create false centres, a typically anti-Christian behaviour. We make or locate false “hearts-of-the-matter” which, due to the centrifugal character of the anti-Christ’s expansionary tendency, its chronic extroversion, simply create greater division and greater distance between individuals, creating greater extremities to be factored into the overall equation. One could say that this aspect of its nature is the chronic proliferation, the prapañca, of “extra-versions”, an endless multiplication of fragments, specialisations of language and alliance, preferences of opinion and alignments of thought. This occurs as sociological fragmentation and psychological fragmentation, leading to an increasing state of “archipelago-ification”, the state of lost and isolated islands, as the body of Man becomes split off into discrete “I lands”. This is what happens when we approach a perceived problem with an immature capacity to discern, which we may call mere judgement, the difference being that judgement is inherently selective and excluding, whilst discernment remains a disclosure open to the wholeness that needs always, in its essence, escape the thoughts of men. Discernment is thus informed by compassion, which is always an all-inclusive approach, a package deal that promises both the particular and the whole their due consideration. Compassion entails that we withhold our action, our good-doing activism,  our warrior-like righteousness, and take the time to feel out, with the objective receptivity of the heart, the whole situation at hand, all through its many dimensions as a human, ecological, sociological, psychological, political, philosophical, cosmic, spiritual etc. polylemma. No one angle, to compassion, suffices as a guidepost by which we embark upon the journey to a solution with ample presentiment of success. All angles must be accounted for, so no cause which relies upon a dualistic division and simplification into sides “for” and “against” can suffice to solve our problem. The problem that is the anti-Christ is a problem in Man and of Man in the world. A solution entails a solution to everybody’s unique all-too-humanness. The problem of humanity is that of our duality between apparently irreconcilable divinity and beastliness. The anti-Christ stands, in its initial phase, as an image of the dysregulation of these two poles of our being. 

Thus a solution to the anti-Christ begins with truly addressing the scope of the matter, which is akin to packing well for a journey, such that we know we are fully equipped for the road ahead, albeit at the whim of uncertainty and chance. But at least, with a well packed bag, we are free to aim for the heart of the matter, the true destination of our need to solve the situation in which we all find ourselves, and we may travel without detour. WIthout detour we may reserve our energy for the tour de force of our journey’s end. The end of this journey toward solution is the final intro-version of the anti-Christ, its inversion, by which it perceives to its own heart and recovers its essence. The reason why so often we find we add to the problem when we try to solve it in a limited or partial manner is that in identifying the issue outside ourselves, in one or another crisis or predicament, we imply that we are not involved, that the recognition of the heart is a matter for someone or something else besides us - too easy it is to forget that all we experience is but one process, and that each of us are part and parcel in the being of the anti-Christ, and God. We perpetuate the dysregulating tendency of the anti-Christ the more we engage in behaviour that is divisionary. It’s all too easy to reject the idea that we all are the anti-Christ, in one aspect or another, and thus play the game of self-denial and self-protection from implication in the solution, of being that which ultimately, collectively, is to be worked out. Oddly enough, our common acceptance of fallenness is a gateway to collective exaltation. Speaking psychodynamically, the ego fears its dissolution in the solution of Man and the world, for only to an ego is there a subjective Man and an objective world. The problem of Man and the world is, I suggest, categorial in essence, a mistake of seeing the categorial as essential. The ego is but a category error, and fears its own resolution with truth. Again we return to primary ontological error, sin, the essence of the fall. 

We all are engaged in the anti-Christs primary abduction, and push away from our hearts, which too bear some degree of the beast's mark, be it imposing mastery, slavishness, undisciplined genius, heedlessness, greed, loneliness etc.. This abduction is chronic denial of the centre. Thus we are abducted into the shadow along with the anti-Christ, for the shadow is the psychological manifestation of denial and rejection. In deducing the scope of the problem we must reject nothing - the spirit of this age casts its shadow over the whole earth, and Man’s whole cosmos. Then we can embark on the movement of intro-version, the intro-duction of the anti-Christian spirit to its inverse phase, the heartfelt form of its journey to Self-realisation and self acceptance. Then we can consciously reduce its morbid and evil aspects, and reveal the waiting good. Intro-duction is the first beginning of the anti-Christ’s true life, as a being that knows itself and sees its own core and essence, and this requires that we know ourselves and see our own core and essence. The personal and collective equations are simultaneously solved; one induces the other, one is conducive to the other. The Kingdom, thus, is what is made of the anti-Christ’s psyche upon its inversion, upon its about-face which takes it from its opposition of Christ to its position as Christ. The anti-Christ thus rendered is just the movement away from what Christ represents, the union of Man and God, and in its return to its own heart it will careen toward that union again. Anti-Christ and Christ are but one being, a dance in time between the loci of time and eternity, a dance that resonates within the rhythms of History yet echoes beyond, and tells us of our journey from heaven and back. 
The significance of the abductive aspect of the anti-Christ is the will-to-expansion, which we hesitate to equate with growth, evolution or true development. The will-to-expansion is rather in essence inflationary, and correlates psychologically with ego inflation. The inflated ego corresponds with the complimentarily deflated Other, be it the otherness of individuals or “The Other”, God. Inequality, therefore, is a natural tendency of abduction. When good hearts fight for a cause from an abductive stance or attitude they tend to increase inequalities, or highlight and reify them. The quality of this abductive movement is self-escape, self- avoidance or a “stealing away” of self, all implying a loss of the capacity to rest in one’s core central being, as well as a complimentary self-location in a false centre. When we buy into a false centre and run with it we become an aspect of its functional constellation, and this necessitates a degree of unconscious surrender to the forces which constitute the organising principles of the nature of that centre. I say unconscious because the underlying motive is often an unseen will-to-expansion which the constellation of the false centre promises in and through its relative power. This is why, it seems, that it is those who feel most powerless, not necessarily those whose objective power to cause effect is most diminished, who sign up to become martyrs for contemporary causes. These are those ones who, like the anti-Christ, have not found power in the Self. Though they believe themselves to be good and representatives of the good, they largely are unaware of the fact that all power issues forth from the heart, both as a symbol for the cosmic or ontological centre, i.e. source, and the literal human heart, which when open carries the divine qualities of soul, such as reason and love. “God is a circle with centre everywhere and circumference nowhere.” This great truth expresses the relation of all hearts to ultimate power, goodness and truth. The abductive movement of the anti-Christ runs directly contra-centre, chasing periphery perpetually, and courting extremity, the antithesis of heart-centredness. God having its centre everywhere expresses the ubiquity and equality of the power of Spirit resting in all manifestations. “The Spirit bloweth where it listeth” and rests eternally in the movements of time. God is rest, the rest that is the root of equality, stability, peace and balance. Again running counter, the abductive tendency of the anti-Christ is always running, always in flight. It can never stabilise relations but rather tends toward their breaking point, and stretches relations out, thinning bonds. It makes relations tender and precipitous, bringing about the need for greater attention. Within the rest of God’s centre we find a deep flexibility; with the flight of the anti-Christ from this centre we have chronic exertion, the buildup of cortisol and lactic acid, cramp and stress, tender and tired limbs tending toward burnout and disintegration. Between false centres we are forced to craft roads and bridges which in time wear; a ubiquitous centre is a seamless link unto itself, and nowhere do we find the “between”. Let us not shun the hubs and cities of mind and matter, but we too must remember that life begins again over the threshold of the city gates, and grows even there between the cracks in the pavement, ruled not by Man nor what is caught in the netting of his world and (qua) worldview. Life at every level is; between, through and beyond our fabricated centres of signification, of limited and conditional recognition, and even the great webs that we call theory, though touchstones to the secrets of Nature and her hidden potentialities, are no reconstitution of her living tapestry of natures and experiences. To fight the cause that is the reconstitution of Christ’s way of love, goodness and inner dignity for all requires that we find the rest, and the more, that lies in our centrality, as a precondition for any activity in the world that is truly healing and recovering of power.

The centre is a symbol for identity, the core and essence. A false centre implies a false essence. Abduction implies the movement away from a True identity into and through a proliferation of false identities. Though useful and necessary to a point, “conventionally relevant” so to speak, we don’t find rest in ourselves until the true centre is located. 
Meaning is the name we give for what happens in experience, between what is experienced and an experiencing consciousness. It is the medium of perception, the prima materia of phenomenality, qualia. We are in the habit of seeking the meaning of things, which would yield names and descriptions; we are firmly ensconced in the Rupaloka. Living meaning, on the other hand, is the nature of experience, not one of its artifacts. We must seek to see as they are the ways of meaning, those ways that become the forms of experience. Even in contentless awareness there is meaning, for without the content of time, body, mind or sensory awareness, meaning’s inception is the eternal self-reflection of pure consciousness, aware that it is aware. This meaning is experienced as profound, inalienable fulfilment. This is the original contentless-content, contentment. This is the knowing of being that precipitates the formula sat-chit-ananda, being-knowing-bliss. Meaning as spoken to here is just this; the true form of Being in experience; the means and medium of all knowledge in experience; the essence and mystery of joy in, and love for, the very act of experiencing anything, or nothing. The false self, the erroneous centre within infinite centrality, the point in the field (which is but the field posing as a point), with its various forms of conscious contact with the world, filters these primary qualities of meaning through its inherited and adopted preferences. Preference, like the devil, is an abandoned child, one that seeks adoption, who must get their way before they can experience Being, knowing or bliss - or better yet, self-identity, clear consciousness and basic happiness, joy de vivre. 

The Devil runs from preference to preference, in flight from the meaning that banished him to the world, the very world where preference appears to grow like a clinging vine, entwined about the great tree of life. This tree has itself a kind of preference rooted in the adaptive survival mechanism, in instinctive avoidance of danger and attraction to nourishment, which we could say is meaning at work in the life of Nature. This twisted vine, however, grows thick and grips tightly as a result of the Devil’s soil; it expresses his expansionary tendency and can well begin to kill the tree it clings to as it begins to block out and strangle the canopy, which is sustained by the light and warmth of struggle, discomfort and pedagogical failure. Adaptive survival knows that to fail is to, in time, succeed; preference, however, is a fatal and immediate demand. Both indeed grow for and grow toward one sky, the open horizon’s of safety and satiety, which upon up the limitlessness of life in their own unique ways. The great tree, unlike the vine, is firmly rooted in the ground which is the source of limitless creativity, freshness and flexibility; preference, like the Devil, hardens into stone, and like a riverbed becomes more staunch and wedded to its ways. When we cling to preference we end up petrified by the complex fluidity of the world, as we carve ourselves stable routings by which to ease the burden of navigating life. But we do so, via preference, by moulding the world and its ways of appearing to us, rather than being open to the world’s unpredictability, and thus mouldable in our contact with it. Preference reduces our world, and for this we are rewarded with a concomitant reduction in our sense of being and wholeness. Preference is dependent upon false centrality and could well be viewed, as a dominant modern cultural value, to be born of the anti-christian spirit. If what the growth of vine and tree aim for is safety and satiety, the comfort and contentment of a refuge, then preference can be seen to be in the process of suffocating our true refuge, steadfast vulnerability to the winds of the world, by posing as a refuge. 

When it comes to one's survivability, the strategy of enmeshing in the web of life, preference appears to go a long way. But for beings endowed with reason and intuition, do we need to seek more advantage? Insofar as we are localised, individual beings then a little preference can indeed go a long way to reflecting in the world an implicate nature, a characteristic essence, which may even seek the foundation of preferential conditions which help to build those little sanctuaries and limited refuges in which we can play with the release into the preference-free ground, beyond all refuges yet firmly at home. Then we may really know a true love of life, a true allowing of all experiences, even of preferentiality itself.

What fruits upon the great tree of adaptive survival are principles, general and open invitations to helpful ways of behaving, flexible meanings and adaptable codes, like wild fields where for all visitors something of meaning and use may be gleaned, expressing an ecological spirit. Preferences are closer to principalities, little localities adapted to a given way which is taken to be ultimate in a cultural sense, and are ruled by those who own such ways, fixed and bounded, frequented by those who fit the dominant functions of the principality, or else the gates are shut tight and locked. The requirements for entry are strict and well regulated, as are the responsive forces ready to pounce upon intruders or outcasts, those who are not with the preference and thus are not-preferred. To the elect, the preferentially treated, it is a heaven and utopia; to the prejudged it is a hell and dystopia - the rest, the vast majority, remain on neutral terms, for fear of expulsion from their refuge, and these go largely unseen, both to the arbiters of admission and rejection, those prime forces of reward and punishment which keep the form of such a land of preference in check, in habit. 


Maybe we could use the term “mistaken” as opposed to “false” when talking about the Devil’s notion of self. This would be a step toward compassion.


The true theism is mono-poly, shiva-shakti. The mono and poly exist in ambiguous relation, as they are both relative and absolute, yet neither. Man is made in this image. Man's inversion, in the Devil, is God's inversion, the inversion of ambiguous mono-poly into a certain monopoly. This is the manifest form of the Devil.


Like the snake in the garden, the story of the Devil is the story of the birth of human suffering, of its conditions and dynamics. The Buddha taught us the end of suffering, not as the eradication of pain for mind and body, but as the remembrance of our identity with that ground of Being which doesn’t partake of the cause of suffering, be it essentially the knowledge of good and evil, or in his terminology the clinging to likes and dislikes, to preferentiality. We can reach this remembrance by developing compassion for our preferences through a rigorous sensitivity to their mysterious and spontaneous origination as historically conditioned acquisitions of body, mind and soul in their relationship to the world, and as present and future arisings in experience which, through the identification of Being with them, coalesce and coagulate into the image of the limited self, the ego-self. By recognition of our identity as compassion itself we are weaned off of the need to change experience, such that it suits one preference or another. This, in turn, changes experience profoundly, both in terms of perception and conception. Perhaps this is better called a redemption of experience, a return to an original state of noble and detached loving consciousness. This is a truly evolutionary change, the return of emergent consciousness (meta-consciousness) to the undifferentiated consciousness from which and in which it temporarily emerges, a re-merging with the essence of existence. So it is with the anti-christ; it is a symbol for both the suffering that ensues as consciousness embeds in and entangles with emergence and for the journey back to “mergence”. But this symbol also contains the intertwined stories of the individual and collective levels of life, and further knits together the evolutionary spirit of the times with the resting spirit of the depths, which remains the passion and muse of evolution, the alpha and omega. This symbol is the single-origin story of Man and Man’s cosmos falling into the suffering of mistaken identity, and falling back. It is the story of pain’s simultaneous appropriation and denial, and of pain’s simultaneous reacceptance and release. It is the story of pleasure’s becoming an addiction and its reframing by simple, unattached ubiquitous joy. It is also the story that ends Man, for we will find there is only the divine; then a new story will have room to emerge. 


“You are dead to me.” said the anti-christ to his Father, as those who have been rejected often say, or think to say, to their rejector. Although this pronouncement was untrue, and still he wanted his Father’s love, the anti-christ believed his own words and went on to build his fallen reality from this original act of hateful self-deception. So he found his feet, and in time Man came to see things his way, whereupon one of our prophets spoke out saying “God is dead.” But truly what had changed was that the lie had come to live, bringing a sword to the throat of truth. The death of The Unborn can only be a lie, a particularly piquant kind of hubris. God, however, remains dead to the anti-christ, and this has allowed the spriteling child to take up the mantle of the spirit of the times. I think the Father is playing a long game, letting himself die in his child’s eyes, to set in motion a process of growth through trial - a parental experiment. Sometimes it is only pain that can set the course for a child’s maturation. 


The Devil’s intolerance of our trueness and freedom is the toll for our tolerance of his faux- “truth” and faux- “freedom”. His excess consumption of his own lies is the source of his intolerant attitude, which is a strange form of self- hate, shame and disgust. He lives out a chronic jouissance born of a total lack of self restraint, producing the pained-pleasure of his imposed and fallacious reality, which he laps up with slighting vigour. He can neither moderate nor mediate between the opposites in his own nature, which are the obsession with (his) truth and the obsession with deceit - only one of these two may have a voice in his heart at any one time, thus debate and dialogue are stifled, the dialectic of true development dies, and only one-sided inflations can occur. His truth, taken to be absolute, is not allowed to enter into that process which like a smith’s hammer crafts a true form through great work - thus he must censor and deceive with great guile, for he knows his position is but a waypoint on the journey to understanding and revelation.


The anti-christ is modern Man as we know it, our 2 faces. His equation is the mystery of suffering and its solution. Only with compassion do we reach that solution, which is the unification of what we suffer over and liberating acceptance. This solution necessarily leads Man beyond Man into total inherence, coherence and transcendence, to the immanence in all things, and transcendence into no-thing. This is the destiny of Being’s play as Man-and-World. This is the only outcome of our Being that could come to manage the forces of Nature which the anti-christ, the nature of our times, has wrested from the Earth and stars. It is the globalised suffering of Man and the World which sets apart anti-christian awakening from all previous, purely personal stories of awakening. Gaia in her totality here must awaken to her true nature, and we carry the force of loving consciousness that may take up “Nature” and “the human world”, which together are Gaia, as the suffering mass which shall fuel our incipient and redemptive love. All begins and ends with true care, but we must bring care to the middle, to the centre, the heart, and let be what has come upon us, and come through us. The alchemical transformation of Gaia requires the problem of Man and the solution by God through Man’s consciousness - this problem and solution is the anti-christ. He is our collective Evil-ution, which is to bring back the Good.


Stymied by stimulation, he is addicted to activity, in burgeoning excess. He mistakenly equates work with wakefulness, and can never rest. He seeks to be truly awake but ends up running into heedless productivity, relentless becoming, never resting or pausing for breath and thus is divorced from the source of inspiration. His addiction is particularly vicious because no matter his output or what he puts out he can never become the one that makes things work. He can only put things to work, but cannot create the essence of “working”, harmony, reciprocity and coherence. He would also like to be what is happening, in its totality, but can only ever make the next transient fad, what happens to be “happening”. He aspires to become life, what alone happens, but for all his outward seeking and exploring of ephemera he never happens upon living. He cannot accept what happens to be and thus cannot tarry with any established truth. His reality is a “virtual” reality which is limited to mimicry and reinforced with haptic feedback. Despite all his efforts, he cannot contrive what he yearns for, precisely because it is what he happens to be running from. He is really running from the essence of happiness, and in seeking this happiness in work and works falls into the wheelhouse of suffering. He is a hapless fellow, and with such talents as that Doctor Faust displayed, his haplessness constitutes a real shame and squandering. For our Devil, it is shame that guards the gates of his heart, blocking the flow at the threshold of truth.


The Devil was cast out over the threshold of Heaven, and took this to heart. This, the history of his begrudgement, has come to be expressed in his style of living, for he is the crosser of lines and the breaker of boundaries. He has and will continue to cross the line, in one sense to break new ground, and in another sense to deny and dominate all grounds. There is one Ground, however, which cannot be denied.


Potential is the pearl growing in the shell, in the centre between extremes, under immense pressures and necessarily closed off, who’s growing extremity feeds its shine.


He is a gifted child, a young savant, master of techne of all sorts, a prodigious prodigy bankrolled for his projects by parents of the greatest wealth but yet who remain “angel investors”, aloof and at a distance, who have left the child out to be raised by the wolves, so to speak, who are his feral, beastly au pairs. He thinks, as do his peers, that he has all he could ever want, and can do whatever he could want to do. But his heart is unsatisfied; he craves unknowingly the presence and love of his parents, not just the effects of their riches. So he goes on crafting, wielding technique and instrumental skill in the service of a heart that just wants to be at home with Mum and Dad. 

One of his many skills includes the art of chemistry. He is a great divider, distiller and synthesiser, a deviser of medicaments and tonics, but none of his many potions could heal his broken heart. Some of them knock him out and numb him, others stimulate him so that he can work all day and night, some send him on wild trips through dream, fantasy and spurious, numinous imaginings of unknown, exotic lands. Never do his concoctions bring him nourishment.

An inherently lonely child, all his playmates are lured into his house, and they are mesmerised by his trappings, his gadgets, toys and projects, his playhouse of make-believe workings, but he cannot resonate with any of them because he doesn’t share their innocent joy. His friendship tends toward their corruption and eventual destruction. His heart is sick and hard, theirs vital and vulnerable, and thus they enter into a land of danger in his abode. They are transfixed by his many accoutrements, not knowing they are additions upon his primal negativity. They come to envy what he has, not realising that all he has is part of an attempt to discover or produce something that could let him experience love, and which never bring to him what he so direly needs. 

He is determined like headstrong youth, and will work to no end to craft the love he unknowingly seeks. Truly he works to no end, for there is no end in sight when your end is an impossibility to your means. You cannot craft love, but you can express it through your works, give it permission to spread its wings and take flight in your life such that it may find, in your experiences, those base materials out of which love’s nest is crafted, such that love may raise its children, joy and peace, in your very being. But he cannot see the simple truth that you cannot craft that which is uncreated, and his young heart, stuck in a broken home, cannot admit its determination is, after all displays, utterly worthless. 


The archipelago of intersubjectivism is an invasion of the land - the land is the corpus of Humanity, the wholeness of our Being. It's not invaded by a foreign force but by a lost origin, the ocean womb. We have become re-enwombed, though we could easily mistake this for entombment - when we know these waters as an extension of our individual being then we are born again. The islands in the archipelago are egos, the water is our collective soul. Each of us must step to our shores and listen to the ocean winds; then we will hear the news that we are one but not alone. The ego cannot quite hold this apparent contradiction. How could we be both waterborne and landborn? Would this not make us amphibious, like the unmade toad prince of fairytale? Well, the ego doesn’t dream and thus doesn’t get wet. The soul, on the other hand, wakes when the ego sleeps and walks to the waters nightly to bathe, and ever if she is crowned in one’s heart then she stays swimming in the depths, retrieving for the landlocked ego the secrets of the sea, the organics of the sun’s aquatic activity, and the cumulative flotsam deposited by each and every island in the archipelago. My island of me and mine, is in truth not invaded by the waters but emerges from them. Gladly do I slip back, the waves now lapping at the shoreline of my heart, speaking the eternal whisper of common origin. 

(The great contradiction is that Being is both land and sea, ego and soul. I am that, yet I am me and I am I. From the perspective of Being, both ego and soul are apparitions.)


The Devil is a workaholic, but when it comes to cleaning up after himself he is unremittingly lazy - unless he makes cleaning his work. Rest is the child of clarity. When he cleans he clears nothing up nor clears anything away, but rather he reorganises the mess, creating more compartments and dumpsters to hide his clutter. He cannot process his debris properly. Nothing is recycled but rather it’s all stuffed away and veiled by his willing forgetfulness, cast into a mistaken annihilation, becoming dead to him but not truly allowed to pass on, leading to an environment growing sickly with the decay of his refuse, with the decay and disease born of his refusal to expunge, purge and cleanse. He mistakes the obscuring work of making something meaningless with the passing on of the meaningful, its being devoured, broken down and integrated. Only love for the passing-on of things can bring freshness and clarity, as this is the origin of matutinal revival, rebirth- this is the value that rest brings, digestion. What the Devil passes off as clarity is insipid, a haunted and harangued presence that cannot meet death and release into new life, and thus is a poltergeist pestering his soul. Thus his nihilistic heart is never at peace, for he arrests the flow that is, in its totality, true rest. The Devil can never be the creator he wishes to be, for he cannot reach that seventh day and relax into his ease. No, his sweeping away of things is a brushing off of the responsibility to respect ends, to respect the fact that reality says no, one day, to every heart, only to make space for further creation, to vouchsafe the immortality that gives rise to a life. He hates life so cannot let himself, nor the world he builds of his crafts and toys, be swept up in the living process. He is fixed in place, a stubborn old goat, loveless because he refuses to be swept off his feet, a puer aeternus because he cannot move toward experience, despite being couched in the myth of progress. We must offer him our love, we mortals, clean and simple. Most assuredly does love give us over to the journey toward destined unity, in which nothing goes to waste. Most assuredly can love help him clean up his act and make an honest man of him. All of time is destined to return, a cycle running through eternity; if he will not recycle his ways, he will stop himself from living again. Perhaps his self-hate wants just that, another frustrated impossibility born of reeling against the way things are.


He garners excitation but is himself over ex-citation, an over excitedness that leads towards the pronouncement of uncited claims, marks and remarks that cannot be accounted for in the annals, or which lie outside the guiding law of precedence. He is beyond honest justification for his beliefs and actions, beyond the labour of providing reference for the stature he imposes, and he is insistent that he rests on the work of no other. He is thoroughly anti-historical, wiping and appropriating the record. He is the breaker of records by the power of making records; off the record yet the record keeper, he cannot and will not contain himself, such is his ex-citement. For him, such an absence from the account is freedom and justification for his undignified caprice, which his shame and self-censure keep unofficial and unrecorded, or redact after the fact. As record keeper, however, his attempts to contain are chronic - his self-made skin is always cracking, and he is constantly touching up his facade. He is ever busy obscuring the original record which, though subjugated, is untameable and ever seeking to reassert itself, like a flower growing up through the pavement - this is the life beneath the skin. His constant attempts to manage the facade are the root of his vanity, and the activities which comprehend his ugliness. His containing is his uncomely fabrication, that which smites the beauty which tries to break through, the breakout beauty in him that is his essence, truth and inner reality. That he believes all this to be ugliness is his prime error in judgement, such that he can’t let his own truth speak for itself. 


The ego is the vessel and subject of transformation; use it as a scientists would use a beaker - do not drink from it, but in it play the elements against one another, draw them out of their combinations and conflations, treat, temper and heat the exterior, distil the essences, recombine and study reaction. Seek in this work true discovery. You are a vessel; become a maker, a son of God. 


I find a cocoon spun about us all, it comes from where? Suddenly it seems we are deprived of the air. This glittering chitinous shell captures well, putting us to bed in the stories we tell. It entraps us in a veridical dream, we live it but see not its means, nor what it aims for, its great portents, as wings we grow by the angel sent. Yet at once it becomes from dream a nightmare, double edged do wounds prepare. All at once we are one and two between, married and barred by a common seam that binds and divides old and new, enwrapping a darkness that denies the view. Hung between, twofold, of one body changed, til twofold winged emerging rearranged. From body to corpus, energy transformed. From body to body, the shroud shall be scorned. It is its very nature, that nature contained, to swallow the body and make a heart unfeigned. 


He’ll fake it til he makes it, then continue to fake it til it breaks. Pedal to the metal, one bump is all it takes. One sharp turn will flip the lot; to fake life to make life is creation not. A little image helps to build a new world, but to ground in image is a great fault. Though image is the beginning of all activity, to rest in image brings activity to a halt. Imagination is the birth of creation, where nestles meaning and purpose as seed. But truth is the darkness of soils that never spoil, the work of light in deliverance of need. He is the denial of vital darkness, and a light without the warmth to nurture, so his light is as good as morbid shadow, his dark no womb of rooting fervour. Making the false is his creation, where imaginations sink, until our dreams are the only lights in his darkness, the only starkness that could wrest him from the brink.


For a master of bullshit he is oddly allergic to nonsense. He can feign a no-nonsense attitude when he needs to, becoming strictly business, no play, the serious sort. This is part of the strange game he plays, his own little fallen lila; it is the game of “not playing games”, utter solemnity, dry and staid. He would have us believe that he is not playing around, that he's one to be taken seriously, that indeed he is an emperor with clothes; our believing this is his need and deepest insecurity. Like those who speak from and to the familiar only, sense and sense-making become a stock and a retrieval, a clinging and returning to establishment, a senseless and uncreative approach that tends toward commonality, arbitrariness, ossification and stagnation. A kind of sense without true common sense is formed, which lacks the natural and open fertility of the commons. What communications he can’t make sense of, like the pips and titters of the morning chorus, he believes to be utterly meaningless babble. Thus he cannot foster the spirit of communitas but only build common bubbles, in which ears are always turned toward the echoes within the thin translucent skin of division, and members breathe a stale, imprisoned social air. Could it be, contrary to the obvious, that nonsense is really the womb of sense making? Nonsense calls us forth to wonder at meaning, to venture our guesses and let context respond and define. The openness of wondering nonsense allows meaning to ripen as bespoke and unique, as a child of what speaks here and now. There is a fake timelessness in the bubbles, expressing itself as an ossified economy of signs, a kind of trading of contemporized fossils, stripped of the depth their lost living had devised in the very act of their becoming fixed tokens. By their becoming standardised and universalised communications of value, life in the bubble becomes sanctioned into safety, though devoid of living meaning. True sense making is a kind of present archaeology, digging into the darkness of sense yet to be known. It offers us a promise of real treasure, rewarding our faith in hidden gifts of meaning, and becomes a most special way of playing with the secrets of nature. The Devil conflates non-sense with insensibility, not realising how sensible it is to forgo our prior findings and have faith that meaning will come, floating through us on the winds of expressive passion and need, like incense dancing in the temple - in such a way, our faith in meaning’s arrival becomes an offering to the source of understanding, who repays us with the joy of comprehension and its ripe fruits, true communion and living engagement, cooperation and cohesion. Then our dance makes sense to us for when we dance with it, getting our backs off the wall, it makes sense for us. When we forgo the bubble we can play the game of language-in-a-world, and speak with life through every sense, hearing the depth that calls out through every voice, through every power of soul. 

Book 2 -


His worth is not true worth, his light is not true light. He holds to the vulgar values, like those mistaken “alchemists” of old, who succumbed to the finitude of materials. What value the Devil keeps in reserve is always fractional. He cannot ever give himself wholly; unlike the Father, who stomach’s emptiness for the sake of the creation’s flowing, gifted fullness. The Devil’s worth, therefore, is far from the wealth of life’s givenness, but is the essence of life on loan, inherently coming strings attached. The richness of vitality is well afforded by the Devil, but at a cost. The strings, the cost, is ones being solicited to give him reality, returning to him what he cannot create for himself, the real living value of Being, which we have by birth from the Father. He has shunned the Father and forsaken his value, and thus must find ways to indebt us, we carriers of celestial gold, for not even he can live without traction in life’s economy. By buying into the Devil’s lies, into the conceit of his lonesome grandeur, we feed his inflating ego and nourish his prideful exceptionality, which we might deign call an “erroneous account” or a “bloated claim” - we pay in to his fund and become his livelihood. His exceptionality is a derivative brilliance dependent upon the Father, who’s light shines in him as the embezzled flame stolen before descension. He takes this character trait to be his own, manufacturing his deceit, and maniacally defends against all exceptions to this blatant duplicity. Further, once we begin to live by him, to tarry in and indebt ourselves by his inflationary worth, he will accept no exceptions to the terms of his loan - agree with the conditions of his deceit, pay the interest he demands, or he’ll foreclose upon you and claim what’s essential to you, as he’d always sought to. This system of self-inflation is the result of his imprisoning himself in his own lie,  and if we were to stop paying attention, our worth and value, to his false accounts, he would have to rob us blind to bail himself out, to prop back up his lie by forcing attention, by constricting our living capacity and syphoning it off. His demands depend upon the little reserve we have deposited to him, such that he can loan us back the conjuring trick of inflated value; he gives us the illusion of the infinite, mimicking the infinite in his apparent “growth”, but he cannot admit that he relies on our concrete Being, our actual definiteness and reality. He lacks definition, thus seeks infinitely greater resolution, but still he lacks the resolve to solve himself. He first would have to accept his nature as false-infinitude, as a confused fabrication of the real, as an inherent problem, before he could dissolve it and find inner resolution and peace. Unfortunately, he resists this definition of his nature for he would rather believe his own lie - thus he resists his particular reality, and feeds off of the real in and through all things. He is a fraction of the infinite, an infinite fraction, dividing all to support his condition. All conditions other than his own he could sully and pollute, those natural conditions which are yoked by the spirit of interdependence and togetherness, reflecting abundance of heart. 

He is neither infinite nor truly finite either; he may better be called un-finite, tending toward everything and tending toward nothing. He waxes lyrical, talking it up, toward All, puffing up and out, ballooning with hot air, manifesting a trend toward the general and extremity. He wanes without humility, destructively approaching zero, specialising, specifying, collapsing and imploding, tending toward a precise nought. But he never reaches what he reaches for; he never finds definiteness, nor does he ever grasp wholeness. In his perpetual rushing-toward he never gets to take hold of Being, nor of non-Being, which are the loving partners of life’s truth. No, he is the doomed project of an endless becoming, a dis-location through and through. 



Ungenerous non-generation, the eater of the generations. 


The Devil lives the peril of absolute freedom, absolute access and is caught in seeing all things as up for grabs. He cannot square this state with his absolute desire which tears him in all directions away from his heart. He makes the crucial error of believing he can both want everything and obtain everything; this is the error of equating the freedom to seek and hunt with the freedom to take everything he catches. Not to obtain from his efforts he would call disempowerment, not realising however that his prey must have the chance to regrow if he is to have something to catch in the future. His will to obtain takes no heed of that which he takes from, and he is always at risk of making fallow the hunting grounds he plays in. 

As he seeks all and races toward all he tempts the annihilation and cancellation of the opposites; thus we could say he embodies the essence of divorce, the break-up of unity that yet remains a cloying bond. He is an inverse unity, un-dual rather than non-dual like his brother/father, carrying in his heart the split of a departed marriage. Without respect for any covenant, the remnants of togetherness become contracted to fealty, though he bids the opposites to go their own way. He doesn't yet understand that absolute freedom is not an unchecked freeness; it is Being, paradoxically free of its beings. The Devil’s freeness is that of a prisoner released though still bound at the wrists. True freedom is free from the need to seek freedom. The activity of seeking freedom evidences and reifies the bound. What draws us on toward a promise of freedom is born of the deceit that what we are must be “found”!


He fell down from heaven; Man rose up from the Earth. He brought with him a shard of the light; Man releases his shadow from the belly of the depths. He was expelled from the light of the Father; Man was delivered from the dark womb of the Mother. He lives shrouded and veiled by his own light; Man lives stark in the open, in a world his knowledge can’t shine a light upon. He is the lowliest precipitate of celestial fullness; Man is the greatest sedimentation of terrestrial dust. Descending from the transcendent, ascending from immanence, Man and the Devil are destined to meet in the middle, to overshadow both of our origins and veil from one another our true nature. 


Behold and take hold of the spectacle. Place yourself outside of the fray. Blinded by the crying light, the Poet, so subtle, seems to have little to say. He remains a whisper upon the listening winds; our Devil would have you gawk and gasp. What a sin to shout and tout as treasures those natures ubiquitous that serenade the heart.


The great Showman, an utter show-off, who won’t show up anywhere that he can’t show up the rest. His show must go on, lest he is shown what lays behind the curtain, that realm where the showlights don’t reach. Demanding a good showing, he believes he shows the way and tolerates nobody who might attempt to show him the light; he cannot bear to be out shone. Every interaction of his is a showdown, and he would hate to be shown the door that leads out of the ring. He too must be the showstopper, even though it’s always showtime. Always on show and playing to the crowd, he resists that inevitable moment where it becomes clear that it’s all for show. He’ll gloat and showboat to let it be known that he is the top dog. Even when we think the show is over, for him it is never truly seen off, never given over to the tide of reality. It’s not only all for show, it is all show, and alone he cannot close it. Man alone can close the Devil’s show, or else we’ll be drafted into the show notes, for the Showman, though so much he has shown Man, makes of our humanity a no-show. We must show him what we are made of, raw unscripted Truth, which no display of the senses may show up. For all too long we have been one of his show pieces, an ornament of his action. We must show to his final act, which is to realise in himself that which is beyond all action and acting. 


The brother Christ cast a great shadow upon Man, overshadowing us all with his perfect image. In this shadow his brother floundered and begrudgingly schemed. Now the light has waned and the image too, giving space for Christ’s brother to come into his destiny. But Christ’s image is the image of not only perfection but its eternal rebirth, its deathless potential. It’s this potential for rebirth that gives him a place in the shadow of the brother who has risen and tried to swallow him. In the shadow of the prince of darkness lies patient and potent the fecundity of the lord of light. But he is not to come in the way he did before, in the form of but one meagre and ineluctable jew, for the shadow of the Devil is cast in every heart. It’s the Devil’s divine imperfection which has allowed him his resting place in the very bosom of human reality, unlike the Christ ideal which was too ascended and unreachable for the quotidian men of now and yore alike - hence this image became the guiding light of a mytho-religiosity that anchors the mere mortal to their coil, and paves the way for power games to be played upon the chessboard of dogma and wrath. Now, with the Devil at the helm, humanity is primed for Christification; with darkness at its height, we may find our solefaction. The ground is prepped in every soul for true awakening, not just devotion to the awakened, for only a truth so unanimous as human weakness could be a foundation for a collective recognition of our essential unbreakableness. Christ indeed is the image of perfection, but this image carries with it the pain of incompleteness, incomplete because it lives divorced from the wily sibling, and it's this truth that has put perfection at fault. Thus the Christ ideal can only meet the world in its integration of the wicked and imperfect one,  and in tandem wickedness must come to its fullest living expression. Life must know the true extent of wickedness and imperfection if it is to see its completeness. Perhaps this is why the Devil comes on the 6th day of creation, the turnaround phrase that creates the tension appropriate before that rest is found before creation returns home, to help this climactic return be felt in its immensity. By the work of the Devil will Man become complete, bringing home to the perfect spirit the wayward spirit of imperfection. His work is that which gives out to the world the desperate and morbid “perfections” consequent of incompleteness, those harangued searchings for Truth and Beauty which spell out the opulent and majestic tragedy of our age. But in a way these consequences of incompleteness are a perfecting of the world itself, a completion of truth through an acceptance of imperfection and illusion - there is no room for one-sidedness in truth. Once the dysfunction of the Devil is truly given space Christ may alight in the collective heart; his divine mistake was to rob each man of his potential for awakening, despite being the very image of the awakened one, by coming to be known as the awakened one, the one and only God-man. Christ did this, unknowingly, by robbing each of the sacrament of their own suffering. He suffered for our sins, throwing the responsibility to suffer and its significance off of the individual. It is this suffering that his brother returns to us in spades, stark and raw, the core property of the unawakened being, that noble yet haunted estate that Christ traded for his divine kingship. Suffering is the penance by which we purchase our rightful divinity, by which we claim our redemption, and this act we cannot offload onto any other. 

Though the image of humility itself, Christ could not prevent our making him, in time, the image of prideful perfection and redolent righteousness. This crystallisation of his image enacted the retaliatory movement of the imperfect and the wrong (or false), in its own way a necessary righting of a wrong, for we didn’t listen to Jesus and his life’s example, but we let Christ’s beatific perfection blind us.  Jesus told us “Be unto yourselves Gods, for the kingdom is within.” - we, however, projected our inherent divinity upon Christ, thus darkening our hearts and diminishing our Being, crafting a dwelling for his brother. We ourselves enact the devourment of Christ and what he as a living spirit represents, and for this we are yet to forgive ourselves; we are yet to know this action as the origin of our Anti-Christian world. We are yet to find compassion for that being who, when presented with his greatest spiritual potential and the promise of his true nature, shrank back into abeyance, back into the weakness of a disbelieving, limited heart. We are yet to forgive ourselves, to forgive Man as such, because we are yet to accept the task and duty that Christ offered, the noble task of becoming what we truly are, the divine duty of being what one truly is. Thus the rebellious and perverted spirit of his brother found fertile ground in our unacceptance of our own Christliness, and this spirit enforces the samsaric labour of becoming what we, fundamentally, aren’t, and the indentured servitude of being what we aren’t - these are the primordial conditions of suffering. Oddly enough it’s the image of goodness that seals the fated ascendency of the Anti-Christian spirit - we are complex beings, good and bad, positive and negative, strong and weak, divine and animal, thus all favouring of one side of such dualities will lead us away from ourselves. When goodness took our eye, and God became unequivocally the Summum Bonum, evil secretly took our other eye, making the whole world blind. But, what happens in secret is the sacred work of the cosmic soul, the occult work of root and soil, of nascence and essence. It’s precisely where evil shall take us that we will find the good light, still shining illustriously. From the heart of darkness the sacred is destined to rise and redeem our vision, reawakened and restored, to the depth that bifocality alone can recover. 

Both Christ and his brother, in their aloneness, are shallow - it takes the sun and the moon to nourish night fields fallow. 


The simplicity of innocence and the birth of our complex worldview - the innocence of harmony and the birth of chaos


When our freedom loving love of choice meets the hard edge of unbending reality, yet cannot temper its ardent wayfaring spirit, it ranges over the painful imagination of a different course. Choice then becomes a poltergeist, wreaking havoc in our houses. All at once it becomes the ghost of imagination, which needs the freedom of the fields to play its best game, as well as becoming the premature child of the spirit of improvement, whose proving ground is the proof of consequences; consequences are the teachers of life’s logic and branching pathways, presenting to choice the field of its possible action. When the spirit of improvement is premature it cannot see the absolute perfection of all events as arising in attunement with the character of causes and conditions, and thus such a spirit cannot accept what is, for it thinks what is could be or should be otherwise. Indeed things can always be imagined to be otherwise, but the spirit of wisdom seeks only to align with the way things are, rather than presuming from a finite perspective that there is a better or more true eventuality to be sought. The lack of such an alignment, accompanied by the desire for an imagined improvement or betterment which uses as a measuring stick the conditioned taxonomy of the good, true and beautiful, is what we call suffering; suffering is to see in one experience the ghost of another, to crave a ghost that we wish to be born. Suffering is the grief of this “non-birth”, the resentment and resistance to what appears to one as a wrong birth, insofar as we bear phenomena by our conception and our clinging to the subject-object illusion. Where our displaced imagination taunts our pain with the image of the painless, or goads our yearning with the image of pleasures unceasing, we suffer the moment because we in essence deny it; we do not allow the moment its place, displacing ourselves and fracturing our Being. All makes its way to arising, in the here and now, upon the pavings of the laws of change, and our limited conception of and preferences about change rally hopelessly in rebellion, crushed by Time’s greater authority. To escape such authority, such divine authoring of the story of life, we develop “virtual” realities, in which we set our preferences and impose a code at their service, living by the algorithms of our habitual fabrications, feigning free will and possession of the flow of time. In doing so we make real the denial of perfect, immutable order that in the wild, chaotic cosmos evidences the reign of a limitless, sovereign intelligence and original organising principle of all phenomena. But even this power of ours, which finds the order redrawn on a partial and personalistic basis, is a child of the cosmic way, a vision evolved to see the forks in the road. It both gives us insight into the pathways toward greater pleasure, greater good, greater freedom and greater capability, as well as trap us in their image. This throws into relief the fact that this power is doomed to fail, for in our relative nature we seek to destroy what to us is the lesser and reify what to us is the greater, not recognising that life, though evolving seemingly at random, is an orchestration of the highest contrivance. Yet still it opens out possibility, and becomes one of the ways by which the cosmic spirit can expand its efficaciousness. At bottom, despite our caprice, the Way of life as imagined/realised by God remains untarnished by our wishes, and acts both in spite of and because of them. Choice must know its limits, difference must know its relativity. In the absolute freedom of the ego’s imagination they become confused. Choice and difference come to fetter the imagination, who’s freedom is an eternal beginning, a meaning-moreness, by making the imagination servant to ignorant wishfulness, expressing the wishful ignorance of choosing which censors away the truth of Nature as it expresses itself in the karmic perfection of our life in process. Everything is indeed in its right place, but immaturity of the choiceful imagination suffers in the ignorance of this transcending-including fact of life. Like a teen who only sees their own way, and swears by its ascendency and validity, the immature chooser reflects a rather negative attitude, preaching as they are wont to do the limits of their experience as gospel, uninitiated as they are into the greater fabric of life’s intelligence, thus denying their potential to harness this intelligence, or to really live. but , we must nurture the love that lives through our love of choice, as it informs a better relation to life’s Way; once we exercise choice in the love of every arising phenomenon we fall into a constant tuition, breathing the understanding that carries all moments to their terms, and all forms through their evolution and maturation, allowing the psyche to deepen its knowledge of the language of life. With greater terminological purchase on life’s process we can learn to spell out our own story as life reveals to us who we are to become in time, and thus we can release imagination from its limited grasping at our future, such that imagination can return to beginnings and retrieve for us the advent of a better Way. This I call the “co-it-us” that brings about the birth of our divine, cosmic intelligence, for there is no choice more ingenious and fecund than the choice to bring love to the choiceless, God’s spontaneity and illimitable Being, and the finite ego-mind is brought into intimacy with its very root. How else might we use the power of choice in the service of truth? By this “co-it-us”, the one and the many are unified, birthing the Unborn and Timeless in the children of Time.  


Making tracks - tracking - dis-tract - con-tract - pro-tract - re-tract - at-tract - de-tract - tracked


What is the Anti-Christ? From this perspective it is a movement in the life of this planet, older than Christendom but coloured by its name, expressing a certain set of transformational principles carried in, through and out by Man as such. It is Man’s symbolic psychic activity and symbolic behavioural activity in the world framed as a psycho-spiritual struggle. Beyond any particular cultural context or situationally rooted understanding or behaviour, it is a symbol for the essence of Man-in-the-world and the challenge that Man presents to the world and Himself, the challenge of suffering ignorance and suffering toward understanding, and most of all the challenge of understanding the suffering entailed by our difference and exceptionality upon the face of the Earth. It is a symbol in the truest sense; a living centre through which meaning, and thus the very ground of understanding, finds its way to our capacity to consider, mysteriously enough. It is an empty vessel to hold in hand the contradictions that war in Man’s care, mediating the differences that structure what matters to us in varying degrees, uniting the distinctions which define our all-too-human experience, an ever groping synthesis of the contradictions that undergird the range and region that is Man’s unique being. Therefore, the Anti-Christ is what Man is making of himself, and is, as such, blind to what God is making of Man. 


The separate self is the separated self.


Presence vs presentation 


Celebrity has replaced the celebration of one’s life. In the veneration of the stars we denigrate the star-dust that has come to be all of us. 


Christ is God and Man. The Anti-Christ is neither God nor Man. Man can only be truly Man when he is also God. 


Propaganda only works upon those who for themselves do not take a proper gander at reality.


Groundless meditations on the symbol of uprootedness.


Absolute juxtaposed black and white vs infinite relative shades of light and dark - co-independence vs codependence and nascence


Symbological contemplation resting on an epistemology of emptiness - as opposed to a synthetic approach to the resonance of meanings, as in imaginal contemplation, the natural creation of meanings and resonant relation through the establishment of emptiness/openness.


The divine war of love and hate - love’s greatest power is love, hate’s powerlessness is its hatred.


Market - Markings (creative “text”) - the conmans mark - trauma as the mark of suffering in history - markings as tribal identification mechanism - the marks of the cross (stigmata) - stigmata vs stigma - the trial of individuation - the mark of the beast - the trial of depersonalisation - totality without completeness 


Privation - the destruction of privacy 


Bless his heart - actively 


The emptiness of the symbol - Like an open intersection beckoning travellers to a heart attuned to inflows hailing from the furthest extents of the cardinal directions, the symbol is a place of meetings and passings. Unto all it is the value of capacity, the value of an empty or emptied space that opens out onto our faring, as a flower opens out to release its scent and beckons forth the activity of Nature. What meets at and eventually alights upon our open symbol are meanings, quanta of relevance and their concomitant qualities of resonance. Upon emptiness develops self-organised communities of meaning, built on inter-operating significances that make of the open intersection a settlement and culture  , crafting a character that is ever in the throws of the process of definition and capturing. Only then may custom and convention of meaning form, making of the ambiguity of emptiness the definition of a habitual, recognisable manifestation of being. Emptiness, thus, is no more vacuum, but an invitation to and promise of the potentiality of life and life’s myriad ways as a means to order and beauty. This is the fundamental understanding that opens the way to symbological contemplation; moreover, it opens the way from the symbol to the timeless wisdom of the spirit, the wisdom of Truth’s rooting in mystery or the emptiness of phenomena. Symbological understanding makes of all apparently fixed, defined and inherent essences a phantom, and allows what appears to us as distinct natures the opportunity to engage in an ever provisional project of free association, free movement and free exchange of significances, a kind of creative activity that gives flight to unique communions of unique meanings, allowing relevance to always find redefinition and freshness, i.e renewed relevance. Ultimately, conceptual understanding recedes in humility when faced with its ground, empty presence, that living significance that is ontological bedrock, dependable yet utterly independent, true and sure yet totally indefinite. The true symbol stands between the world of concept and that of utter emptiness; it partakes of empty nature, opening out beyond itself through participation and and devotion to the mystery, but holds out tendrils of recognisable conceptual and aesthetic patterning such that our cognising consciousness, our “meta-cognition”, based on thought’s syntactical structure of signification, can array about the dark core of mystery constellations that bear the effects of that mystery’s bivalent capacity to intelligently and meaningfully organise, whilst grounding this work in groundless being. Though a kind of specifying and speciation, the symbol’s life is always a movement between specification and creative ambiguity, thus through the mystery meaning can live out its evolutionary necessity, developing as a result of a fundamentally transcendent symbolic core which allows for the acute destiny of any symbol as a given meaning or assemblage thereof, whilst leaving its essence free and undefined. Thoroughly grounded in the groundless, symbological contemplation is a party, a participatory activity in which meaning is invited to dance with itself and foster new inner relations - the word is allowed to take flight. This is an antidote to the stagnation of significations that occurs through the rigidification of conceptual conventions within a cultural context. This stagnation is a fossilisation of Truth, which would be most free when allowed to find itself freshened by the flow of life, with the reality of immutable changefulness. 

As a reflection of primary emptiness, we take on the attitude of openness to the mystery when contemplating the symbol, when opening our doors to fresh understanding, resonating alive in Presence without the shackles of expectation, anticipation or any other of memory’s usual demands. But, unlike this primary and profound comportment to the ground of cognizance, the particular aspect of mystery that a symbol points to, though ultimately ineluctable, is a ground for relatively definite forms of understanding, and thus carries an instrumental value. Its value, however, is relevant within a domain less so given credence in our age, the domain of primordial conceptuality, wherein the creative separations and differentiations of meaning-cum-being that characterise our everyday use of concept are still intermingling and interfused, retaining their ambiguous non-dual nature of absolute interrelation, of uncollapsed co-determination, of duality and multiplicity still bound up by the complementarity and underlying unity of contradictions. This is the realm of the primordial Word, the Tao of understanding, of Vak before manifestation, the bearing ground of epistemology and ontology. Here we step back from night and day, into the mottled, shifting shades of twilight. To roam here is to practice in conceptual freedom, yes, but a rather exalted freedom this is, as thinking of its own accord returns to the homeland of thought’s genesis, the “ranging” activity of the unified opposites in their pre-conscious productive tension, that Region so dear to Heidegger as the resting ground and open abiding of Being’s total  unvariegated self-knowing. Here contemplation is attuned to its origins, the utterly laden silence at the base of all utterance. Beyond our prescribed symbolic centre, this way of thought allows for all experience to step forth as symbolic, at least in potential, and thus each experience is a gateway to the unified field of meanings that enfolds, includes and actualises the unique ontology of every form, and their meta-formal interrelatedness and connective co-determination. Each phenomenon, ascertained as a discreet or nested whole, is eligible for entry into the poetic language of Nature’s lexicon of beings, from the perspective of one's own evolving engagement, as sense renders form in meaning, as experience renders what’s there as relation. Every phenomenon of signification can thus become, above being just a thing and a sign for that thing, a means of pointing to the all encompassing mystery by way of every possible concretisation of meaning in thought and feeling. Such all encompassing mystery necessitates this universalizing relation because it is the living ground of relation, in which thing and no-thing are unified as life’s irreducible potential. 

The Way of life is the Way of meaning; by rooting our thinking in the emptiness of symbological contemplation we let our minds make-way for Truth, over and over. Then meaning itself has the space to walk its talk and breathe the freshness of moment to moment creativity, thus allowing life to return to what lives


Certainly it’s true; a good man is a bad man’s teacher, a bad man is a good man’s job. But the Good in Man is in need of learning, and only the Bad in Man can provide the necessary tuition; Good in tuition is so badly needed. For if a good man is to come into a fluent expression of his curriculum, he must study his poorly brother, who as yet is held in his long shadow; who of goodness, these days, is willing to look into the depths of the heart of evil itself? We have come to know the many expressions of human evil through the approbating course of our late history, coming to taste and bitterly swallow the regrettable extents to which Man has been able to inflict suffering upon his fellows, and though we have overcome those acute episodes of Fascism and Totalitarianism which leer at us from the all too short distance of recent history, we are yet to expiate the Spirit of evil as it pertains to the potentialities that fester in the human heart, awaiting ripe and loathsome conditions. This is so because we are, despite many a desire to claim otherwise, at one with the root of that evil; and this is evident in the fact, revealed in the last half decade, that we as a contemporary global public are largely insensitive to and uninformed about the psycho-spiritual origins of these evil regimes and the episodes of atrocity which medal these regimes; these origins are (reductively speaking) the conditions of loneliness, alienation, meaninglessness and anxiety, and they come hand in hand with a world run by the banalising force of institutions enshrined by a base and arbitrary will to power. We, the self-proclaimed good, have not made good on the duty we hold to this accolade of moral valence, but rather, for the most part, have opted for the pursuit of the “good life”, that most enduring distraction that hums with the resonances of banality and arbitrariness, that most tantalising temptation offered to the middling soul, appealing to our better nature’s tendency to weakly wish away difficulty, discomfort and darkness, and in turn shun the feedstock of growth itself. The image and promise of the “good life” is perhaps the most profound work of the Serpent’s tongue. 

So alluring is the simple aspiration to live well, and we are unaware that to some degree the “well” is tainted; the well has had the skeletons of humanity’s ills dumped into it, hidden within it, and from the inside has become contaminated, making odious the waters drawn from it. What chiefly contaminates the well, however, is the corpse of true wellness, which is a body kept living by humanity’s collective heart and is no isolated, individual project, for humanity’s heart unifies heaven and earth, and thus regulates with its rhythms the project of unified cosmic beauty. It’s clear that we cannot rest contented nor seek to, as the Good would have it, because the tension between Good and Evil once again calls our attention, and louder by the day cries this call. Only in a climate where goodness has lost itself could such a need for attention rise, for we are mistaken to think that evil grows of its own accord. No, if evil is strong then the good has clearly grown weak. Thus we must start our task from where we are, and seek an honest appraisal of the good in our times; then it will become more clear to what extent we have let the wolf come to lay its head with the lambs, and how deeply we have forgotten the role of true goodness, that of the shepherd. It’s no wonder we live in an age where so much language carrying the symbol of the sheep proliferates; goodness finds itself led by unknown forces, and what an aberration of goodness this necessitates. How could the so called good man be a teacher when he has no authority, when he has, knowingly or not, handed over his authority, or simply let it be taken? How can the bad man be taught when the good man has become self-contained and self-absorbed, yet to (and largely unwilling to) take up the task of tutelage? That self-defeating pursuit of self-satisfaction which dooms the “good times” with their inevitable end is precisely that which engenders the rise of Evil as an incontrovertible consequence of seeking a lower form of the Good. The Good that can redeem is that primordial Goodness that is, in fact, truly great. Greatness is a Spirit that remains unsatisfied, so that it can be an unbounded bounding toward unknown heights and ever aspire to life’s coy, flirting potential, a spirit sown by the hands of mystery in our deepest hearts. The Good that is unsatisfied is that Good that has taken the world as a task, a responsibility and a true care; it has courage enough to take the world to heart. We have let slip our greater Good. 

Contented with “good enough”, we forget that evil excels in our comforts, lest we seek ourselves to excel in goodness, good enough becomes a decelerating force, until the divine rest of the heart of the Good is mimicked by an ersatz stillness, becoming a paralysis and apathy. True rest never stops, never arrests time or action, but rests in the fulfilment of the irreducible “ought” of our being. If “good enough” becomes our life’s work it’s all too easy to forget “what’s Good”; namely, that which takes to task the bad in Man, the spirit of care itself, the very heart of awareness. We have let something unholy rise up and masquerade as the good, both within us and without us upon the world stage, and it’s become our delusion and unbinding, for now we know not for what we and the world suffer. We have forgotten not only what’s good for us, but we’ve forgotten that the Good can only be what’s good to us, the value we hold in the estimation of righteousness and dignity. Because we allow the reign of bad men we tacitly and largely unconsciously enable them, value them even; this is why the redemption of the Good must begin at a manageable level, as a coming to terms with the image of the bad in Man. With such an image in sight, we may clarify the image of the Good , so as to know what it is we ought strive for. Then we may actually approach the reality of Evil. This is why I’m suggesting we start with the symbol of the Anti-Christ and first take a stroll through his neighbourhood. Perhaps in doing so we may bring home the image of Evil, and perhaps we’ll recognise how close to home this Anti-Christ really is. 


The Anti-Christ’s 5 ignoble truths:

1. Man will make a living hell.
2. The cause of living hell is Man’s clinging to darkness.
3. The cessation of darkness is achieved by the light of awareness.
4. Awareness of darkness requires allowing darkness.
5. Allowing darkness requires we acknowledge it, and tend to its reality

. 
HE never really wakes but neither does he sleep. His existence is a kind of concrete hypnagogia in which he is constantly pedalling to himself his own dreams, and constantly buying them. His powers of persuasion are so well developed that he’s come to believe that his dreams are true, thus believing in his own power to make dreams come true. But, for one, this belief occurs only in his dream states; his realities are plastic because they never have to work with the facticity of reality, nor the absoluteness of the Real, yet he is fooled by his own skill at moulding about him worlds of delectable realism and profound detail and resolution. Thus he finds a way to live his dreams quite comfortably, quite stolidly entranced. 

Secondly, he has a tendency toward nightmares and terror, and this is what tends to become of his dreams; dark messages take form in his nightmares, messages of unmet pains beckoning in the narrative and its characters. Thus he ensnares himself in the power of his inner pain, which rises through his perpetual somnolence and enwraps him in his deepest fears. Reacting to such episodes, he frantically spins the weave of his desire about his mind, rebuilding each newly collapsed false paradise. It is lost on him that, as fear and desire are sisters of discontent, that the more voraciously he chases his dreams the more dark and disturbing will his nightmares become; the more he builds his hermetically sealed false-paradisal state the further he will have to fall from it, for his dreaming is ever doomed to recapitulate the reality of the painful events which, in his ineluctable sleep, he so desperately tries to hide form and deny. The dream weaver cannot face up to the reality implied in his nightmarish predicament; the nightmare that is Paradise-known and Paradise-lost.
